Toxicology in  Vitro  1 I  (1997)  45 l- Insecticide  Cytotoxicity  Induction and  CYP  1 A l/ and  Rat in  Primary  Human  Hepatocyte  Cultures G.  de  SOUSA*,  F.  FONTAINE,  M.  PRALAVORIO, D.  BOTTA-FRIDLUNDT, Y.  LETREUTt and  R.  RAHMANI* *Equipe INSERM,  Centre  de  Recherches INRA,  41  Bd  du  Cap,  06606  Antibes and tService  d’HCpatologie, HBpital  de  la  Conception, 147  Bd  Baille,  13005  Marseille,  France the  question  of  their  safety  has  become  to  the  major  belonging  of  compounds  CBR), carbamates (carbaryl: DFU)] demand families the  increasing (diflubenzuron: [such  compounds chlorinated  (malathion, hydrocarbons  tetrachlorvinfos: expression  was  assessed  by  ethoxyresorufin (DDT),  MAL,  TCV),  pyrethroids Abstract-With  for  insecticide  products,  one  of  the  serious  world  public  health  concerns.  The  capability  insecticide  as  organophosphorus  CPR)  and  benzoylurea  has  been  tested.  Cells  were  treated  during  3  days  with  six  non-toxic  CYPIAI  activity  O-deethylase  induction  was  observed  with  TCV  and  DFU,  both  blots.  A  strong  and  dose-dependent  five-  and  sevenfold  over  control,  induction  regulation  mechanisms  induction  in  both  3-methylcholanthrene),  EROD  tests  demonstrated for  CYP  IA I gene  expression  types  compared  with  approximately  whereas  DDT  and  MAL  showed  no  action  on  human  hepatocytes  the  MTT  and by  the  two  compounds. and  CYPlAl  mRNA levels  were  correlated and  in  rat  hepatocytes increasing  (EROD) in  inducing  CYPIAI in  rat  cells.  Finally, studies  performed respectively) insecticides. cytotoxicity differences significant induction between (approx. (approx. 2.5-fold activity using cell doses  of  insecticides and  by  Northern  (approx.  in  human  sevenfold).  However.  EROD  different CBR  and  CPR  exerted  l6-fold  but  decreased less  for for  DFU  but  not  for  TCV,  suggesting 0  1997  Elsevier  Science  Ltd in  rat  and  human  hepatocyte cultures  and the  neutral red (cypermethrin: Abbrevistiom:  diflubenzuron;  serum;  MAL  =  malathion; CBR  =  carbaryl:  DMSO  =  dimethyl CPR  =  cypermethrin; CYP  =  cytochrome sulfoxide;  EROD  =  ethoxyresorulin O-deethylase; P-450;  DFU  =  FCS  =  foetal  calf 3-MC  =  3-methylcholanthrene; NR  =  neutral red;  TCV  =  tetrachlorvinfos. INTRODUCTION to routes (Hodgson in  constant 1996).  Although exposure  in  workers, are  widely  present  exposure in  our  environment,  for  humans,  occurring short-term  (acute)  are  well  documented their  possible  problems.  neurotoxicity Pesticides  resulting  and  Levi,  1996;  through  many  the  risks  associated  with  Thomas,  these  high-level  there  is  compounds  role  in  many  great  debate  concerning  Such  problems  chronic  health  human  and  reproduc-  include  carcinogenesis,  less  is  known  tive  and  developmental  about  chronic  effects  of  low-dose  residues  in  food  and  drinking  water  on  the  liver.  Only  a  few  data  about  specifically  are  P-450s  insecticide  (CYPs)  (Ikeda  et  al.,  1991;  Li  et  al.,  1995),  an  enzyme  superfamily  in  xenobiotic  detoxification  (Denison  and  Whitlock, to  play  an  and role  processes available  action toxicity,  but on  hepatic cytochrome toxification concerning insecticide important known Among  all  the  CYP  forms  expressed CYPIAI is  an ubiquitous 1995;  Gonzalez  et  al.,  1993).  in  the  liver,  aromatic poiycyclic *Authors  for  correspondence. monooxygenase en-  is  and (PAH)-responsive  1989;  Okey 1989).  Like  some  other  drug-metabolizing that et  al.,  1994)  of  procarcinogen  genotoxic  metabolites the  activation  reactive into (Nebert,  in hydrocarbon  zyme  involved  promutagens  (Nebert,  its  enzymes,  polymorphisms  not  constitutively  most  toxicological  indicator  of  environmental  enzyme  activation  the  most  responses,  doses  of  a  given  chemical  lethal,  or  overly tissues, sensitive  since  it  generally its is  of harmful induction expressed potentially the  samples clinical  relevance  and  has  been  proposed is  governed  induction  (Nebert  et  al.,  1996).  As  CYPIAI by  genetic  is  (or  only  at  low  level)  in  and  as  an  of  et  al.,  1994).  This  to  be  one  of  cellular  takes  place  at  much  lower  to  cause  toxic,  effects  by  the  same  chemical.  been  in  this (Kopponen  could  be  considered and  subtle  biochemical those  known information hepatocytes effects have than of cultures to  provide  as  they  represent  system, Primary  demonstrated  matter,  cellular  et  al.,  1993)  and  xenobiotics  can  Furthermore, in  which  hepatic  induction  be investigated  of use (Daujat the relevant  a  metabolically et  al.,  1990)  of  simultaneously. competent  (Fautrel human cells offers toxicity 0887-2333/97/%17. SSDI  0887-2333(97)00061-l +  0.00  0  1997  Elsevier  Science  Ltd.  All  rights reserved.  Printed in  Great  Britain G.  de Sousa et al. f z  a

l  MAL +  DDT Cl  DFU Fig.  1.  In  vitro  cytotoxicity of insecticides determined by the neutral red test, after 48 hr exposure.  Results  are  representative  of  experiments  using  human  hepatocytes  (mean  of  five  replicates). considerable  scientific  advantages  because  examples  of  failures  in  the  extrapolation  of  animal  toxicologi-  to  humans  are  frequent  cal  data  (in  uiuo  or  in  vitro)  (de  Sousa  et  al.,  1995;  Rahmani  et  al.,  1993). The  aim  here  was  primarily  to  investigate  whether  various  compounds  belonging  to  the  major  insecti-  cide  families,  such  as  DDT  (a  chlorinated  hydro-  carbon),  malathion  tetrachlorvinfos  (MAL)  (TCV)  (two  organophosphorus  baryl  (CBR;  a  carbamate),  pyrethroid)  and  diflubenzuron  can  induce  or  inhibit  CYPlAl  protein  activity  and  transcription (DFU;  a benzoylurea)  expression  at  the  levels.  Effects  were car-  (CPR;  a cypermethrin compounds), and in  humans  and  in  rats  in  primary examined  both  cultures  of  hepatocytes.  The  data  presented activity (EROD) demonstrate that  many  structurally  different  insecticides,  such  as TCV,  DFU,  induce  ethoxyresorufin  CBR  and  CPR  significantly  O-deethylase  and/or  CYPlAl  mRNAs,  at  concentrations  toxicity.  Therefore,  posed,  insecticide  chronic  human  health  through  considered. their  respective  are  daily  ex-  to  acute  and  to  these  compounds  the  liver  should  be  seriously below  as  consumers  low adverse  effects  of in  food,  potential concentrations, at  very residues even DMSO 3Mc MA!. DOT CBR CPR DFU TCV INSECTICIDES Fig.  2.  Maximal  induction  effect  of  the  insecticides  on  rat  hepatocytes  by  reference  to  3-MC.  EROD  activity  was  determined  as  described  in  Materials  and  Methods.  Results  are  the  mean  of  four  separate  experiments  in  triplicate.  Chemical  concentrations:  3-MC  (0.5  FM),  MAL  (50 PM), DDT  (IO PM),  CBR  (100 PM), CPR  (100 FM), DFU  (100 p(M),  TCV  (75  PM).  Asterisks  indicate  significant  differences  from  control  (*P  c  0.05;  **P  <  0.001;  one-way  ANOVA  and  Newman-Keul’s  post  hoc  test.

CYP  IA CYPlA + ACTIN

lo Plate  1.  Induction  of  CYPlA1/2  mRNA  in cultures  of  human  hepatocytes.  Cells  were  treated  with  either  DMSO  or  various  concentrations  of  chemicals.  10 ng  total  RNA  was  analysed  and  CYPlAl/Z  was  revealed  with  a  radiolabelled  CYPl  Al  probe  as  described  in  Materials  and  Methods.  Chemical  (lane  1) 2  PM  3-MC;  (lanes  2, 3,4)  10, 25, 50 pM  DFU;  (lanes  5, 6) 5,  10 pM  DDT;  (lanes  concentrations: 7,  8,  9)  10,  5,  25  PM  TCV;  (lane  10) DMSO. Insecticide  cytotoxicity  and  CYPIAlI2  induction (a) 0.

I

,

INSECllClOE  CONCENTNATION (PM\ (b) I DFU

SO

lNSECllClOE CONCENTRATION (PM) increase  of  EROD  activity in  Fig.  3.  Dose-dependent  human  (a)  and  rat  (b)  hepatocytes.  Cells  were  treated  with  DMSO  (0.5%).  or  with  various  concentrations  of  DFU  or  TCV.  EROD  activity  was  monitored  by  kinetic  appearance  of  resorufin  at  37’C.  Results  are  the  mean  of  three  (human  cells)  or  four  (rat  cells)  separate  experiments  in  triplicate.  from  control  Asterisks  (*P  <  0.05;  **P  <  0.001; one-way  ANOVA  and  Newman-  Keul’s  post  hoc test. significant  differences indicate MATERIALS AND  METHODS Chemicals penicillin-streptomycin, Williams’  E  medium, (France).  Dimethyl L-  glutamine,  amino  acids  and  foetal  calf  serum  (FCS)  sulfoxide  were  from  Eurobio  (DMSO),  glucose-6-phosphate,  dehydrogenase,  (3-MC)  were  and  sorufin  (Germany).  (France). glucose-6-phosphate  j?-NADP  and  3-methycholanthrene  from  Sigma  (France).  resorufin  were 7-Ethoxyre-  from  Boehringer  from  Ets  Cluzeau Pesticides  were Cell  culture  and  treatment Human hepatocytes  were  obtained resected  from  secondary  two-step  collagenase  perfusion liver  from  tumours,  by  the  biopsies  classical  technique  (Fabre  et al.,  1988). Rat  hepatocytes  were  isolated,  as  previously  described  (Berry  and  Friend,  1969),  from  rats  weighing  220-240  g.  male  Sprague-Dawley  Freshly  isolated  cells  were  resuspended  in  Williams’  medium  containing  10%  FCS  and  supplemented  with  (50  mg/ml)  and  penicillin  in  insulin  collagen  hepatocytes  were  incubated (0.1  U/ml).  Hepatocytes  were  seeded I-coated  dishes.  Plates  containing for  4  hr  at  37°C  under  a (50  U/ml),  streptomycin type (1  PM),  and  containing humidified  5%  CO?  atmosphere.  The  medium  was  then  renewed  with  the  same  initial  medium  without  FCS  but  supplemented  with  hydrocortisone  hemisuc-  concen-  cinate  trations  of  the  different  pesticides.  Cells  were  seeded  blot  on  analysis,  or  96-well  microtitre  plates  for  EROD.  Then,  insecticides  or  3-MC,  dissolved  in  DMSO  (final  concentration  0.5%)  were  added  to  the  cultures  for  72  hr,  with  a  change  of  medium  every  24  hr. lOO-mm  diameter for  Northern increasing plates Cytotoxicity test The  cytotoxic  effects  of  the  insecticides  on  human  and  rat  hepatocytes  were  assessed  after  48  hr  of  red  (NR)  assay  and  MTT  exposure,  by  the  neutral  (Fautrel  test,  carried  out  as  previously  described  et  al.,  1991). EROD  acticity  assay cultured for  3 days  with  according The  determination  of  the  EROD  enzyme  activities  the  test  in  hepatocytes  compounds  was  performed  to  Reiners  et  al.  (1990)  and  Donato  et  al.  (1993),  with  slight  the  medium  modifications.  Briefly,  after  treatment,  was  discarded  and  the  96-multiwell  plates  were  frozen  at  -  80°C.  After  thawing,  200  ~1 of  buffer  per  well,  NADP  containing  ethoxyresorufm  (0.5  mM),  dicoumarol  dehydrogenase  and  (2  pM)  (0.1  U/ml),  were  added.  The  EROD  activity  was  37C  measured  (i,,,  =  600  nm,  i,,  =  535  nm)  by  following  etics  of appearance  of resorufin  from  ethoxyresorufin. (10  P(M),  glucose-6-phosphate glucose-6-phosphate spectrofluorimetry the  kin- (3  IIIM), by at mRNA  analysis Total  RNA  was  isolated  from  the  cell  culture  by transferred the  acidic  phenol  extraction  procedure  (Chomczynski  and  Sacchi,  1987). 20 pg  RNA  were  size-fractionated  on  a  0.9%  agarose  gel containing  10%  formaldehyde  and  to  a  nitrocellulose  membrane.  Hybridization  was  performed  with  480  pb  cDNA  insert  of  human  CYPlAl  mRNA  corresponding  to  nucleotides  +  3 10  to  +  790  and  labelled  using  ‘:P  Biolabs  kit. Statistical  analysis analysis for  control All  enzymatic results  were  evaluated for  multiple  mean  comparisons using  a  one-way  and  of  variance  insecticide-treated  hepatocytes.  The  statistical  signifi-  cance  was  calculated  using  Newman-Keuls’  post  /lot  test  the  control  set.  Cytoxicity  data  were  standardized  as  the  percentage  of  control  cell  viability.  The  function:  density  =  [(a -  d)/( 1 +  (cone/c)“]  +  d,  was  optical  then  using  a  quasi-Newton fitted  with  non-linear algorithm. estimation against G. de  Sousa  et  al. RESULTSAND DISCUSSION the significant insecticides, studies  of Cytotoxicity that  were  developed insecticides  were  performed  on  rat  and  human  hepatocytes  by  using  well  defined  protocols  in  the  framework  of  a  multicentre  study.  In  this  study,  in  vitro  data  were  well correlated  with  in  cko  data.  Two  the  MTT  reduction  different  endpoints  were  used  -  (data  not  shown)  and  NR  tests.  As  shown  in  Fig.  1,  which  depicts  the  comparative  cytotoxicity  curves  for  differences  were  the  various  observed  between  the  Indeed,  IC,,, values  ranged  from  80  pM  for TCV  to  250  pM  for  CBR,  whereas  DFU  and  CPR  were  devoid  of  any  cytotoxic  hepatocytes.  Similar  results  were  obtained  in  hepatocytes  of  rat  origin.  However,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  owing  to  the  in  the  poor  solubihty  of  some  of  the  insecticides  culture  medium,  be  their  experiments  underestimated.  allowed  us  to  select  the  optimal  concentrations  to  be  tested  for  the  induction  studies. values  may  these Nevertheless, the  compounds in  human effects tested. IC,, The  ability  of  the  six  insecticides in  in  human inducing  rat  and and inducers (approx. activity  was EROD  tested  hepatocytes,  at  various  non-cytotoxic  concentrations.  Basal  EROD  values  for  human  (n  =  3) and  rat  cells  0.057  k  0. 0.175  +  0. (n  =  4)  were  (pmol/min/well),  respectively.  Figure  2  shows  the  induction  effect  of  the  insecticides  on  rat  maximal  hepatocyte  primary  cultures,  by  reference  to  the  positive  control  3-MC.  DFU  and  TCV  are  the  more  potent  five-  to  sevenfold  over  control,  P  <  O.OOl),  followed  by  CBR  and  CPR  (approx.  2.5 to  threefold,  P  <  0.05).  DDT  and  MAL  exerted  no  significant  effect,  whereas  3-MC  (0.5  pM)  provoked  a  16-fold  induction.  Figure  3(a,b)  illustrates the  dose-dependent  effect  of  the  most  active  insecticides  (DFU  and  TCV)  in  respectively.  Although.  human  and  rat  hepatocytes  seems  more  insecticides,  induction  the  for  both  in  rat  (from  approx.  0.36  pmol/min/well  at  important  in  10 PM  to  1.25 pmol/min/weh  at  75 PM),  than  human  cells  (from  approx.  0.193  pmol/min/well  at  at  75  PM),  the  10 PM  to  0.484  pmol/min/weh  is  in  the  same  range.  inducing  However,  could  be  observed:  thus,  in  rat  hepatocytes  (Fig.  3b),  TCV  and  DFU  dose-dependently  induced  EROD  activity  in  a  similar  way  and  the  effect  began  to  be  significant  at  IO PM  for  both  compounds.  In  contrast,  DFU  appeared  to  be  a  more  potent  inducer  than  TCV  in  effect  cells  (Fig.  3a),  with  a  significant  human  results  These  beginning  could  be  explained  either  by  specific  metabolic  pathways  of these  two  xenobiotics  in  rat  or  in  human  cells,  or  different  regulation  mechanisms  for  CYPIA  I  gene  expression  by  the  two  compounds. interspecies  variability lower  concentrations. factor  over  control some at The  increased  expression  of  CYPIAI  protein  was  ascertained  by  the  Northern  blotting  technique,  in  rat  (data  not  shown)  and  human  cells  (Plate  I),  which a dose-dependent demonstrated  increased  accumulation  of  mRNA  encoding  for  this  enzyme.  CYPlA transcripts  were  also  detected,  as  already  the  observed  by  Schuetz  et  al.  (1995).  Surprisingly,  effect at  the  mRNA  level was obtained  only  for  DFU,  as  cell  exposure  to  TCV  failed  to  induce  CYPIAI/Z  expression  transcription.  level  of  observation  may  be  explained  by  a  more  degradation  treatment,  or  different  CYPIA  1 gene  expression  by  the  two  compounds. This  rapid  following  TCV  for regulation  mechanisms these  mRNAs the of at In  general,  although insecticide  concentrations in  the  human  diet  are  very  low,  these  hydrophobic  molecules  are  known  to  be  extensively  accumulated  in  adipose  tissues,  and  may  then  be  liberated  in  the  systemic  circulation.  Therefore,  our  results  suggest  that  care  should  be  taken  because  of  possible  risk  stemming  from  the  exposure  to  insecticides,  given  the  well-established  toxicological  and  clinical  importance  of  CYPlAl induction. REFERENCES Berry  M.  N. and  Friend  D.  S. (1969) High-yield  preparation of  isolated  rat  liver  parenchymal  cells. Journal  qf Cellulur  Biology  43,  506520. Chomczynski  P. and  Sacchi  N. (1987) Single-step  method  of  RNA  isolation  by  acid  guanidinium  thiocyanate-phenol-  chloroform  156159. extraction.  Analytical  Biochemistry 162, Daujat  M..  Fabre  I.,  Diaz  D.,  Pichard  L.,  Fabre  G.,  Fabre  J.  M.,  Saint  Aubert  B. and  Maurel  P.  (1990) Inducibility  and  expression  of class  IA  and  IIIA  cytochromes  P450 in  primary  cultures  of  adult  human  hepatocytes.  Biochemi-  cul  Pharmacology  9,  315-326. Denison  M.  S. and  Whitlock  J.  P.  Jr.  (1995) Xenobiotic-in-  ducible  transcription  of  cytochrome  P450 genes.  Journal  qf  Biological  Chemistry  270,  18 175-l  8 178. de  Sousa  G..  Nicolas  F.,  Valles  B.,  Coassolo  P.  and  Rahmani  R.  (1995) Relationships  between  in vitro  and  in  vivo  hepatic  biotransformation  of  drugs  in  humans  and  animals:  consequences.  Cell  Biology  and  Toxicology  11, 147-153. pharmaco-toxicological Donato  M. T., Gomez-Lechon  M. J. and  Castell  J. V. (1993)  A  microassay  for  measuring  cytochrome  P4501Al  and  P450IIBl  activities  in  intact  human  and  rat  hepatocytes  cultured  on  96-well  plates.  Anal.vtical Biochemistry  213,  29-33. Fabre  G.,  Rahmani  R.,  Placidi  M.,  Combalbert  J.,  Covo  J.,  Cano  J.  P.,  Coulange  C.,  Ducros  M.  and  Rampal  M.  (1988) Characterisation  of  midazolam  metabolism  using  human  hepatic  microsomal  fractions  and  hepatocytes  in  suspension  obtained  by  perfusing  whole  human  liver.  Biochemical  Pharmacology  37,  4389-4397. Fautrel  A.,  Chesne  C.,  Guillouzo  A.,  de  Sousa  G.,  Placidi  M..  Rahmani  R..  Braut  F..  Pichon  J..  Hoellinaer  H.,  Vintezou  P.,  Diarte  I.,  Melcion  C.,  Cordier  A.,  Lirenzon  G.,  Benicourt  M.,  Vannier  B., Fournex  R.,  Peloux  A.  F.,  Bichet  N.,  Gouy  D.  and  Cano  J.  P.  (1991) A  multicentre  in  rat  liver  cells.  study  of  acute  in  vitro  cytotoxicity  Toxicology  in  Vitro  S/6,  543-547. Fautrel  A.,  Chesne  C.,  Guillouzo  A.,  de  Sousa  G.,  Placidi  M.,  Rahmani  R.,  Braut  F.,  Pichon  J.,  Hoellinger  H.,  Vintezou  P.,  Melcion  C.,  Cordier  A.,  Lorenzon  G.,  Benicourt  M.,  Fournex  R.,  Bichet  N.  and  Gouy  D. (1993)  A  multicentre  study  of  acute  in  vitro  cytotoxicity  in  rat  hepatocytes:  irk  oirro  between  toxicities  and  in  viao data.  ATLA  21,  281-284. correlation tentative

Insecticide  cytotoxicity  and  CYPIAI/Z induction 15, Gonzalez  F.  J.,  Liu  S.  Y.  and  Yano  M.  (1993) Regulation  of  cytochrome  P450  genes:  molecular  mechanisms.  Pharmacogenetics 3,  5 l-57. Hodgson  E.  and  Levi  P.  E.  (1996) Pesticides:  an  important  health  for  104, 97-  Health the  environmental  Perspectives but  underused  model  sciences.  Environmental  106. Ikeda  T.,  Tsuda  S.  and  Shirasu  Y.  (1991)  Metabolic  induction  of  the  hepatic  cytochrome  P450  system  by  chlorfenvinphos  Toxicology rats.  Fundamental and  Applied 11,  361-361. in Kopponen  P..  Tijrrijnen  R.,  Maki-Paakkanen  X.,  Von  Wright  A.  and  Klrenlapi  S.  (1994)  Comparison  of  CYPIAI  induction  and  genotoxicity  in vitro  as indicators  of  potentially  harmful  effects  of  environmental  samples.  Archives  of  Toxicology 68,  167-173. Li  H.-C.,  Dehal  S.  S.  and  Kupfer  D.  (1995)  Induction  of  the  hepatic  CYPZB  and  CYP3A  enzymes  by  the  proestrogenic  pesticide  methoxychlor  and  by  DDT  in  the  rat.  Effects  on  methoxychlor  metabolism.  of  Biochemistry and  Toxicology 10,  51-61. Journal Nebert  D.  W.  (1989)  The  Ah  locus  genetic  differences  in  toxicity,  cancer,  mutation,  and  birth  defects.  Critical  20,  250-257.  Reviews in  Toxicology Nebert  D. W.,  McKinnon  R.  A. and  Puga  A.  (1996) Human  effect  on enzyme  polymorphisms: drug-metabolizing risk  of  toxicity  and  cancer.  DNA  and  Cell  Bio/ogy  273-280. Okey  A.  B.,  Riddick  D.  S.  and  Harper  P.  A.  (1994) biology of  Molecular  (dioxin)  receptor.  Trends  226-232. the aromatic  in  Pharmacological hydrocarbon  Sciences  15, Rahmani  R.,  de  Sousa  G.,  Marre  F.,  Nicolas  F.  and  Placidi  M.  (1993)  Potential  of  freshly  isolated  and  human  hepatocytes  in drug  research  and  development.  In  Human  Present  Status  Cells  Within  Europe.  Edited  by  V.  Rogiers,  W.  Sonck,  E.  Shephard  and  A.  Vercruysse.  pp.  117-138.  VubPress,  Brussels. In  Vitro  Pharmaco-toxicology: in Reiners  J. J.,  Cantu  A.  R.,  Pavone  A.,  Smith  S. C.,  Gardner  C.  R.  and  Laskin  D.  L.  (1990)  Fluorescence  assay  for  P-450-dependent  per-cell  estimation  monooxygenase  activities  suspensions  and  cultures.  Analytical in  keratinocytes of  cytochrome 188, 3 17-324. Biochemistry Schuetz  E.  Cl., Schuetz  J.  D.,  Thompson  M.  T.,  Fisher  R.  A.,  Madariage  J.  R.  and  Strom  S.  C.  (1995) Phenotypic  in  induction  of  P-glycoprotein  mRNA  by  variability  aromatic  hydrocarbons  in  primary  human  hepatocytes.  Molecular  Carcinogenesis 12,  61-65. Thomas  R.  D.  (1996) Age  specific  carcinogenesis:  environ-  Health mental  exposure  and  susceptibility.  Environmental  Perspectives  103,  4548.