(A-C) Starting at DIV 7, neural networks were treated with increasing concentrations of deltamethrin (A), β-cyfluthrin (B), and α-endosulfan (C), and exemplary network parameters were evaluated. Time- and concentration-dependent data are shown as the mean of three (A, B) or two (C) independent experiments ± SEM (A, B) or SD (C). AUC values were computed for these data and plotted in a concentration dependent relationship (D-F). Compounds did not induce cytotoxicity (data not shown). Data are represented as the mean of three (D, E) or two (F) independent experiments ± SEM (D, E) or ± SD (F). Replicates within one experiment are summarized by median. Curve fitting was conducted as described in Section 2. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA. A p-value below 0.05 was termed significant. *, significant compared to the respective solvent control.

The hNNF assay was established to model neural network formation and function in a human-based cell model and to become a valuable addition to the current DNT IVB, which comprises 17 different test methods able to measure changes in key neurodevelopmental processes (Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Crofton  and  Mundy,  2021).  Neural  network  formation  and function is currently modelled in an assay based on rat primary cortical  cells  (rNNF),  assessing  the  developmental  effects  of chemicals over 12 days of differentiation . It is important to mention that we aligned the hNNF assay with the parameter set of the rNNF assay, and thus both assays provide  comparable  parameters  of  network  development  (e.g., number of active electrodes or burst duration) to reduce uncertainty. Table 2 juxtaposes the results obtained in this study with rNNF data . Comparing the BMC50 values of the most sensitive endpoint (MSE) between the hNNF and rNNF assay, it becomes clear that the observed positive hits differ in sensitivity across all substances. The rNNF seems to be more sensitive as it detects effects on network activity even at lower concentrations of the tested substances, e.g., deltamethrin (BMC50 MSE hNNF: 2.74 µM; BMC50 MSE rNNF: 0.5 µM). Aldicarb and chlorpyrifos were negative in the hNNF but altered  network  formation  in  the  rNNF  assay. Acetaminophen was tested negative in both assays.

In the present study, 28 substances with different concerns regarding their DNT potential were tested. The compounds are part of a training set used for the current DNT in vitro battery . More information on compound selection  can  be  found  in  Masjosthusmann  et  al.  (2020). As  an assay  negative  control,  acetaminophen  was  included  in  the  test set. The protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor Bis-I was used as an assay  positive  control,  together  with  bicuculline  (BIC)  and  cyanquixaline  (6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione;  CNQX)  for acute pharmacological treatment of networks. Bis-I is known to decrease neurite outgrowth and firing/bursting rates of rat neural networks  ,  whereas BIC and CNQX are GABAergic and glutamatergic receptor inhibitors,  respectively.  Compounds  were  dissolved  in  dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or water to a stock concentration of 20 mM with exception of rotenone (100 mM), BIC (15 mM), and CNQX (30 mM). Applied concentrations ranged from 0.027 to 20 µM and 0.0004 to 0.3 µM for rotenone. Bis-I was applied at 5 µM, BIC at 3 µM, and CNQX at 30 µM. CAS registry numbers, suppliers, and further information are collected in Table S1 1 .
