NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect NeuroToxicology Burst  and  principal  components  analyses  of  MEA  data  for  16  chemicals describe  at  least  three  effects  classes Cina  M.  Mack a,  Bryant  J.  Lin b,  James  D.  Turner c,  Andrew  F.M.  Johnstone a, Lyle  D.  Burgoon d,  Timothy  J.  Shafer a,* a NHEERL,  ORD,  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC,  United  States b N.C.  School  of  Science  and  Mathethmatics,  Durham,  NC,  United  States c North  Carolina  State  University,  Raleigh,  NC,  United  States d NCEA,  ORD,  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Research  Triangle  Park,  Durham,  NC,  United  States A  R  T  I  C  L  E I  N  F  O A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T Article  history: Received  19  November Accepted  28  November Available  online  8  December Keywords: Neurotoxicity  screening In  vitro Chemical  ﬁngerprinting Microelectrode  arrays  (MEAs)  can  be  used  to  detect  drug  and  chemical  induced  changes  in  neuronal network  function  and  have  been  used  for  neurotoxicity  screening.  As  a  proof-of-concept,  the  current study  assessed  the  utility  of  analytical  ‘‘ﬁngerprinting’’  using  principal  components  analysis  (PCA)  and chemical  class  prediction  using  support  vector  machines  (SVMs)  to  classify  chemical  effects  based  on MEA  data  from  16  chemicals.  Spontaneous  ﬁring  rate  in  primary  cortical  cultures  was  increased  by bicuculline  (BIC),  lindane  (LND),  RDX  and  picrotoxin  (PTX);  not  changed  by  nicotine  (NIC), acetaminophen  (ACE),  and  glyphosate  (GLY);  and  decreased  by  muscimol  (MUS),  verapamil  (VER), ﬁpronil  (FIP),  ﬂuoxetine  (FLU),  chlorpyrifos  oxon  (CPO),  domoic  acid  (DA),  deltamethrin  (DELT)  and dimethyl  phthalate  (DMP).  PCA  was  performed  on  mean  ﬁring  rate,  bursting  parameters  and  synchrony data  for  concentrations  above  each  chemical’s  EC50 for  mean  ﬁring  rate.  The  ﬁrst  three  principal components  accounted  for  67.5,  19.7,  and  6.9%  of  the  data  variability  and  were  used  to  identify separation  between  chemical  classes  visually  through  spatial  proximity.  In  the  PCA,  there  was  clear separation  of  GABAA antagonists  BIC,  LND,  and  RDX  from  other  chemicals.  For  the  SVM  prediction  model, the  experiments  were  classiﬁed  into  the  three  chemical  classes  of  increasing,  decreasing  or  no  change  in activity  with  a  mean  accuracy  of  83.8%  under  a  radial  kernel  with  10-fold  cross-validation.  The separation  of  different  chemical  classes  through  PCA  and  high  prediction  accuracy  in  SVM  of  a  small dataset  indicates  that  MEA  data  may  be  useful  for  separating  chemicals  into  effects  classes  using  these  or other  related  approaches. Published  by  Elsevier  Inc. 1.  Introduction Microelectrode  array  (MEA)  recordings  have  been  widely utilized  to  study  the  effects  of  different  drugs  and  chemicals  on neuronal  network  function  (Keefer  et  al.,  2001;  Gramowski  et  al., 2000;  Gopal,  2003;  for  review,  see  Johnstone  et  al.,  2010).  More recently,  it  has  been  proposed  that  MEA  approaches  could  be  useful as  to  characterize  potential  neuroactivity/ neurotoxicity  of  chemicals  (Johnstone  et  al.,  2010).  Recent publications  have  demonstrated  the  reproducibility  of  MEA  data across  different  laboratories  (Novellino  et  al.,  2011),  the  ability of  MEA  approaches  to  distinguish  neuroactive/neurotoxic in  vitro  screens * Corresponding  author  at:  Integrated  Systems  Toxicology  Division,  MD-B105-03, U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC  27711,  United States. Tel.:  +1  919  541  0647;  fax:  +1  919  541  4849. E-mail  address:  Shafer.tim@epa.gov  (T.J.  Shafer). 0161-813X/$  –  see  front  matter .  Published  by  Elsevier  Inc. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2013.11. compounds  from  non-toxic  compounds  (Defranchi  et  al.,  2011), and  that  these  characteristics  of  MEAs  can  be  applied  in  higher throughput  platforms  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012).  Thus,  recordings  of neural  network  activity  using  MEAs  can  be  utilized  as  an  in  vitro assay  for  hazard  identiﬁcation  of  potential  neuroactivity/neuro- toxicity. Development  of  in  vitro  assays  that  predict  adverse  outcomes based  on  toxicity  pathways  was  a  key  concept  in  the  NAS  report  on Toxicity  testing  in  the  21st  century  (NRC,  2007).  In  vitro  assays  that measure  endpoints  that  can  be  related  clearly  to  adverse  outcomes in  vivo  via  a  toxicity  pathway  will  be  more  useful  in  making decisions  about  chemical  safety.  However,  neurotoxicity  can  result from  a  wide  variety  of  different  insults  to  the  nervous  system,  thus there  are  numerous  potential  toxicity  pathways  through  which chemicals  may  act.  Physiological  function,  such  as  measured  by MEA  recordings,  is  sensitive  to  alterations  induced  by  chemical perturbations  through  many  of  these  diverse  toxicity  pathways. For  example,  MEA  recordings  have  demonstrated  that  neural network  activity  is  sensitive  to  disruption  by  heavy  metals  (Gopal, C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– Fig.  1.  Spike  and  bursting  activity  of  cortical  networks.  (A)  Example  recording  from  a  cortical  network  showing  activity  of  the  cortical  network  across  the  electrode  array.  Each small  box  represents  an  individual  electrode.  Note  that  the  bottom  row  of  electrodes  is  only  partially  visible.  In  this  example,  relatively  synchronous  bursts  of  activity  across many  of  the  electrodes  are  apparent.  (B)  An  example  of  activity  on  a  single  electrode  (circled)  from  (A)  showing  action  potential  spikes  (arrow),  a  burst  of  action  potentials,  and the  spike  detection  threshold  (solid  horizontal  line).  Burst  duration  (C)  and  the  percentage  of  spikes  in  a  burst  (D)  are  illustrated  in  schematic  diagrams.  These  parameters along  with  the  mean  ﬁring  rate,  the  number  of  active  electrodes,  the  burst  rate  (bursts/min)  and  bursting  channels  (electrodes)  were  considered  in  the  PCA. 2003;  Gramowski  et  al.,  2000;  van  Vliet  et  al.,  2007;  Parviz  and Gross,  2007),  pyrethroid  insecticides  (Meyer  et  al.,  2008;  Shafer  et al.,  2008),  acetylcholinesterase  inhibitors  (Keefer  et  al.,  2001),  and GABAA and  glutamate  receptor  agonists  and  antagonists  (Gross  et al.,  1995).  While  the  ability  of  MEAs  to  detect  changes  induced  by chemicals  acting  through  a  broad  variety  of  different  targets  makes this  approach  useful  as  a  screen  to  detect  effects  of  uncharacterized chemicals,  approaches  to  classify  such  effects  into  different pathways  would  the  utility  of  MEA  data. further  Therefore,  the  goal  of  the  current  studies  was  to  provide  proof- of-concept  for  chemical  classiﬁcation,  or  ‘‘ﬁngerprinting’’  using MEA  data. improve Spontaneous  electrical  activity  in  neural  networks  consists  of action  potentials  (spikes)  and  organized  patterns  of  action potential  bursts  (Fig.  1).  Most  commonly,  chemical  effects  on network  function  focus  on  disruption  of  network  ﬁring  (spike)  rate, as  this  measure  is  sensitive  to  disruption  by  chemical  exposure  and can  be  easily  and  quickly  extracted  from  the  data  ﬁles.  However, spontaneous  activity  in  primary  cultures  is  further  organized across  time  and  space  in  the  network  (e.g.  synchrony  of  activity). MEA  recordings  made  from  neural  networks  capture  all  of  this information  and  the  resultant  data  could  be  considered  high content.  Other  investigators  have  demonstrated  that  such  infor- mation  can  be  utilized  to  classify  compounds  acting  on  glutamate, GABA  and  glycine  receptors  (Gramowski  et  al.,  2004).  In  the present  experiments,  chemical  effects  on  mean  ﬁring  rate  (MFR), burst  rate,  burst  duration,  potency,  synchrony  and  other  param- eters  were  determined  and  then  utilized  to  examine  if  principal components  analysis  (PCA)  and  other  approaches  could  classify chemicals  by  their  actions.  To  do  so,  concentration-dependent effects  of  a  group  of  16  chemicals  on  spontaneous  network  activity in  primary  cultures  of  cortical  neurons  grown  on  MEAs  were utilized  in  PCA  and  support  vector  machine  (SVM)  analyses.  These data  were  drawn  from  historical  data  (Novellino  et  al.,  2011)  and from  other  ongoing  projects  from  the  laboratory  completed  over  a three  year  period  from  2009  to  2011.  The  chemicals  selected  have known  and  different  primary  modes  of  action  that  result  in changes  in  nervous  system  function,  or  are  known  not  to  cause signiﬁcant  changes  in  nervous  system  activity. 2.  Materials  and  methods 2.1.  Chemicals Table  1  provides  a  list  of  chemicals  tested  in  the  present experiments,  along  with  other  information  including  the  purity, source,  solvent  used  and  CAS  number.  It  should  be  noted  that  MFR data  for  verapamil,  muscimol  and  ﬂuoxetine  has  previously  been published  (Novellino  et  al.,  2011);  however,  other  analyses  (burst rate,  synchrony,  etc.)  for  these  chemicals  have  not  been  published. Data  for  all  the  other  chemicals  are  novel  and  have  not  been published  previously,  other  than  in  abstract  form.  Other  chemicals and  materials  used  were  from  commercial  vendors  and  were  of reagent  grade  or  higher. 2.2.  Cell  culture All  procedures  involving  animals  were  reviewed  and  approved by  the  NHEERL  Institutional  Animal  Care  and  Use  Committee  and all  animal  welfare  guidelines  were  observed.  Timed  pregnant Long-Evans  rat  dams  (Charles  River,  Raleigh,  NC,  USA)  were obtained  and  housed  in  the  animal  colony  in  individual  plastic cages.  They  were  provided  libitum,  and maintained  on  a  12  h  light/dark  cycle  at  37  8C.  Primary  cortical cell  cultures  were  made  from  postnatal  day  0–1  pups  as  has  been previously  described  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012).  Pups  were  eutha- nized  by  decapitation  and  their  brains  immediately  dissected  and placed  in  ice-cold  dissection  buffer  (phosphate  buffered  saline (PBS),  15  mM  HEPES,  pH  7.4).  In  a  sterile  hood,  the  dissected cortices  were  minced  with  ﬁne  scissors  in  a  dish  of  HEPES  buffer. food  and  water  ad

C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75–

Table Chemical  training  set  details. Chemical CAS  # Purity Vehicle Source Mechanism  of  action Previous  MEA  data Acetaminophen  (ACE)  Bicuculline  (BIC) 103-90- 40709-69- 99.0%  >95.0% DMSOa DMSO/EtOHb Sigma  Sigma Cyclooxygenase  (COX-2)  inhibitor  GABAA receptor  antagonist Carbaryl  (CAR) 63-25- 99.8% DMSO/EtOH Chem Cholinesterase  inhibitor NE-  McConnell  et  al., "MFR-  McConnell  et  al.,  2012; Rijal  and  Gross,  2008. #MFR-  McConnell  et  al.,  2012; Defranchi  et  al.,  2011. Chlorpyrifos  Oxon  (CPO) 5598-15- 98.6% DMSO/EtOH Deltamethrin  (DELT) 52918-63- 99.5% DMSO/EtOH Dimethyl  Phthalate  (DMP) 131-11- (cid:4)99.0% DMSO Domoic  Acid  (DA) 14277-97- 90.0% H2O Service Chem Service Chem Service Sigma Sigma Cholinesterase  inhibitor #MFR-McConnell  et  al.,  2012. Voltage-gated  sodium  channel  modulator #MFR-  McConnell  et  al.,  2012; Scelfo  et  al., Peroxisome  proliferator-activated receptor-a  (PPAR-a)  agonist Kainic  acid  receptor  agonist Fipronil  (FIP) 120068-37- 98.5% DMSO/EtOH Sigma GABAA receptor  antagonist Fluoxetine  (FLU) 114247-09- >98.0% DMSO/EtOH Sigma Selective  serotonin  reuptake  inhibitor  (SSRI) Glyphosate  (GLY) 1071-83- 99.3% H2O Lindane  (LND)  Muscimol  (MUS) 58-89- 18174-72- 99.9%  (cid:4)98.0% DMSO/EtOH  H2O Chem Service Aldrich  Sigma Amino  acid  metabolism  inhibitor GABAA receptor  antagonist  GABAA receptor  agonist Nicotine  (NIC) 54-11- (cid:4)99.0% H2O Sigma Nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptor  agonist Picrotoxin  (PTX)  RDXc Verapamil  (VER) 124-87- 121-82- 152-11- 98.0%  >99.5%  99.0% DMSO/EtOH  DMSO  H2O Sigma  Gift  Sigma GABAA receptor  antagonist GABAA receptor  antagonist  Ca2+channel  antagonist #MFR-  Hogberg  et  al.,  2011; McConnell  et  al., #MFR-  Defranchi  et  al.,  2011; McConnell  et  al., #MFR-  Xia  et  al.,  2003; Novellino  et  al., NE-  McConnell  et  al., "MFR-  McConnell  et  al., #MFR-  Rijal  and  Gross,  2008; Novellino  et  al., NE-  McConnell  et  al., "MFR-  Defranchi  et  al., "MFR-  McConnell  et  al., #MFR-  Novellino  et  al., Provided  by  Dr.  Larry  Williams,  US  Army  Center  for  Health  Promotion  and  Preventative  Medicine;  NE  =  No  Effect;  MFR  =  Mean  Firing  Rate. a Dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO). b Ethanol  (EtOH). c Hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine,  hexogen. Next,  trituration  with  a  plastic  pipette  tip  was  used  to  disperse  the cells.  The  cortical  cells  were  then  placed  into  a  1.5  mL  micro- centrifuge  tube  containing  Neurobasal  A  (NBA)  media  containing 10%  heat-inactivated  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS),  2.5  mM  glutamate, penicillin  (100  units/mL),  and  streptomycin  (0.1  mg/mL)  (pen/ strep).  The  cell  solution  was  pipetted  dropwise  through  a  100  mM ﬁlter  (BD),  and  the  ﬁlter  rinsed  with  NBA  media.  The  concentration of  viable  cells  was  determined  using  a  hemacytometer  and  then diluted  to  a  2.5  (cid:2)  105 cells/50  mL.  The  cells  (50  mL  drop)  were  then plated  onto  the  center  of  glass  MEA  ‘‘chips’’  (MEAs;  Multichannel Systems  (MCS),  Reutlingen,  Germany).  The  MEAs  were  pre-coated prior  to  the  culture  with  1  mL  poly-L-lysine  (50  mg/mL,  incubated 1  h  removed  and  allowed  to  dry  completely),  and  then  on  the  day of  the  culture  coated  with  50  mL  laminin  (20  mg/mL)  incubated  at least  30  min  and  removed  immediately  prior  to  plating  the  cells. Cells  were  allowed  15  min  to  attach  to  the  MEA  substrate  before 1  mL  of  NBA  media  (pen/strep)  was  added  to  each  MEA.  Post culture,  MEAs  were  maintained  at  37  8C  in  a  humidiﬁed  5%  CO incubator.  The  day  following  (18–24  h)  plating,  the  NBA  media  was replaced  with  1  mL  NBA  media  plus  B27  SupplementTM.  Four  days later,  this  media  was  replaced  with  1  mL  glutamate-  and  B27-free NBA  media.  Thereafter,  old  media  was  removed  and  MEAs  received 1  mL  fresh  media  every  7  days  until  electrophysiological  recording began.  Before  the  beginning  of  an  experiment,  each  MEA  was covered  with  a  plastic  cap  ﬁtted  with  a  ﬂuorinated  ethylene- propylene  membrane  (ALA  Scientiﬁc)  to  allow  proper  diffusion  of air  and  CO2,  and  to  reduce  evaporation  and  to  maintain  sterility (Potter  and  DeMarse,  2001). 2.3.  Chemical  treatments Stock  solutions  of  each  chemical  were  diluted  with  appropriate vehicle  (Table  1)  to  working  solutions.  Chemicals  were  applied  to the  chips  using  a  cumulative  concentration  exposure  paradigm, ranging  from  1  pM  to  100  mM  (or  higher  when  no  effect  was observed).  All  experiments  were  performed  in  non-perfused,  NBA (glutamate-free)  media.  Immediately  prior  to  administration  of each  dose,  200  mL  of  culture  media  was  carefully  removed  from  the MEA,  added  to  a  glass  vial  containing  the  chemical  and  10  mL  of deionized  water  (d.i.  H2O)  to  compensate  for  any  evaporation  and vortexed.  This  mixture  was  gently  added  back  to  the  MEA,  and  the cap  replaced  to  maintain  temperature  and  volume  until  the  next addition.  A  minimum  30  min  interval  separated  consecutive  doses of  a  chemical.  The  experiment  ended  when  all  doses  had  been administered  or  network  activity  ceased. Post  experiment,  MEA  chips  were  cleaned  for  re-use  as  follows. Each  chip  was  rinsed  with  d.i.  H2O  and  inspected  for  debris.  Next, chips  were  sonicated  for  30  s  before  addition  of  2.5%  pancreatin (Sigma)-PBS  buffer  solution  onto  the  electrode  array.  Chips  were rinsed  in  d.i.  water  18  h  later,  dipped  in  95%  ethanol,  dried  and autoclaved.  Lastly,  chips  were  exposed  to  UV  light  for  30  min  before being  placed  in  sterile  Petri  dishes  and  stored  at  4  8C  until  used. 2.4.  Microelectrode  array  (MEA)  recordings Each  MEA  contained  an  internal  ground  electrode  and recording  electrodes  with  diameters  of  30  mm,  and  200  mm  inter- electrode  spacing.  Primary  cortical  cell  cultures  grown  on  MEAs form  synaptic  connections  and  develop  spontaneous  network activity  (spiking  and  bursting)  between  days  in  vitro  (DIV)  10– and  have  stable  levels  of  activity  thereafter  (Robinette  et  al.,  2011); other  studies  in  our  laboratory  have  demonstrated  that  GABAA receptor  responses  reach  a  mature  state  at  DIV  6-8  (Ingleﬁeld  and Shafer,  2000).  In  this  study,  MEA  chips  with  mature  neural networks  (DIV  13–30)  were  placed  on  MCS  preampliﬁers  with temperature  maintained  at  37  (cid:3)  0.1  8C  by  an  MCS  TC02  temperature controller.  The  system  hardware  consisted  of  four  MCS  1060BC preampliﬁers  that  were  interfaced  to  a  PC  via  MCS  2:1  switch  and  a C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– 128  channel  MC_Card  PCI  board.  This  conﬁguration  allows  for multiple  (up  to  4)  chips  to  be  recorded  from  simultaneously.  MC_Rack software  version  3.6.8  or  later  (MCS)  was  used  for  data  acquisition. Signals  were  collected  with  a  sampling  rate  of  25  kHz  and  high  pass ﬁltered  with  200  Hz  cutoff.  Peak  to  peak  electrode  noise  levels  were 8  mV  or  lower,  well  within  MCS  speciﬁcations  for  planar  30  mm Titanium  Nitrite  electrodes.  Channels  with  higher  levels  of  noise  were grounded  and  not  included  in  data  analysis.  Criteria  for  chip  use included  robust  ﬁring  deﬁned  as  exceeding  a  detection  threshold level  of  (cid:3)15  mV  (a  software-supplied  spike  analyzer  was  used  to detect  spontaneous  events),  and  a  minimum  of  10  active  (>5  spikes/ min)  electrodes.  A  30–60  min  period  of  stable  baseline  (native) activity  was  recorded  for  use  as  an  internal  reference  for  each  chip. MEAs  where  activity  was  clearly  not  stable  (activity  on  all  channels increasing  or  declining  over  time)  were  not  used  for  experiments.  Post hoc,  networks  where  mean  activity  was  not  stable  (mean  activity clearly  declining  or  increasing  over  time)  were  not  included  in  the analysis.  Two  types  of  data  ﬁles  were  saved  from  each  experiment; one  containing  spike  counts  (MCS  software  *.dat  ﬁle)  binned  on  a  per minute  basis,  and  one  that  contained  spike  waveforms  and  time- stamps  (MCS  software  *.mcd  ﬁle). 2.5.  Data  analysis least from  at Each  MEA  chip  was  considered  as  an  independent  observation (‘‘n’’)  for  purposes  of  analysis.  For  each  chemical,  data  was collected  two–three  different  culture  dates. Spontaneous  ﬁring  rate  data  (for  MCS  software,  *.dat  ﬁles)  were exported  into  Microsoft  Excel  and  averaged  across  electrodes  on each  chip  for  each  minute  of  recording  to  produce  a  network-wide MFR  for  each  MEA  for  baseline  (control)  and  each  concentration  of chemical.  The  average  MFR  for  a  10  min  epoch  during  the  baseline period  (immediately  prior  to  addition  of  the  chemical)  was calculated  and  compared  to  an  equivalent  10  min  period (immediately  prior  to  addition  of  the  next  concentration  of  a chemical)  after  each  chemical  addition  to  assess  effects  on  a percentage  of  control  basis.  Data  were  not  utilized  from  a  5  min ‘‘buffer’’  period  preceding  and  following  each  chemical  addition,  to avoid  addition  artifacts,  as  recording  was  not  stopped  during addition  of  chemicals.  These  data  were  then  averaged  over  several MEAs  to  create  concentration  curves  for  each  chemical.  EC50 values (effective  concentration  causing  decrease  to  50%  of  control  MFR  or increase  to  50%  of  maximal  MFR  for  that  chemical)  for  changes  in MFR  (Table  2)  were  determined  by  ﬁtting  these  mean  data  to  a sigmoidal  (log  (agonist)  vs.  response)  function  using  Graphpad Prism  software. Table EC50 values  for  effects  on  mean  ﬁring  rate  and  direction  of  change. Chemical Acetaminophen  Bicuculline  Carbaryl  Chlorpyrifos  Oxon  Deltamethrin  Dimethyl  Phthalate  Domoic  Acid  Fipronil  Fluoxetine  Glyphosate  Lindane  Muscimol  Nicotine  Picrotoxin  RDX  Verapamil EC50 (mM) N.D.  (>500  mM)  0. 5. 0. 0. 7. 0. 0. 5. N.D.  (>500  mM)  1.9  mM  0.07  mM  N.D.  (>500  mM)  0.15  mM  12.3  mM  5.1  mM Direction  of  change #  Networks No  change  Increase  Decrease  Decrease  Decrease  Decrease  Decrease  Decrease  Decrease  No  change  Increase  Decrease  No  change  Increase  Increase  Decrease

N.D.  =  Not  determined  because  there  was  less  than  a  50%  change  at  the  highest concentration  tested. Burst  analysis  was  conducted  by  importing  data  (for  MCS software,  *.mcd  ﬁles)  into  NeuroExplorer  (Nex  Technologies)  and then  applying  the  burst  analysis  tool  in  this  program  to  extract burst  parameters  (Section  3).  In  the  Neuroexplorer  burst  deﬁnition parameters,  a  bin  size  of  0.5  s  and  the  default  values  of  maximum interval  of  starting  and  ending  a  burst  of  0.01  s,  minimum  burst interval  of  0.01  s,  minimum  burst  duration  of  0.02  s,  and  a minimum  of  four  spikes  per  burst  were  selected  to  describe  bursts. Burst  parameters  were  determined  for  each  individual  electrode on  an  MEA,  then  data  from  all  bursting  electrodes  in  a  network were  averaged.  The  data  were  exported  to  Excel  spreadsheets  and bursting  parameters  at  each  concentration  for  each  chip  were determined  by  calculating  the  averages  of  the  bursting  channels  in the  same  manner  as  MFR.  The  parameters  from  the  bursting analysis  included  the  percentage  of  channels  bursting,  number  of spikes,  mean  spike  frequency,  number  of  bursts,  bursts  per  minute, percentage  of  spikes  in  bursts,  mean  burst  duration,  mean  spikes  in bursts,  mean  burst  interspike  interval,  mean  spiking  frequency  in bursts,  mean  peak  spiking  in  bursts,  and  mean interburst  interval  (percentage  of  channels  bursting  was  calculated from  the  number  of  channels  of  the  NeuroExplorer  output). frequency Synchrony  of  network  activity:  Network  burst  synchrony  was determined  in  the  following  manner.  Data  (from  *.mcd)  were imported  into  NeuroExplorer,  and  then  the  timestamps  of  the action  potentials  were  exported  as  a  text  ﬁle.  Based  on  details  in laboratory  notebooks,  additional  ﬁles  were  written  listing  the intervals  for  analysis  (times  during  which  different  concentrations of  each  compound  were  present)  and  the  electrodes  to  be  analyzed. Those  electrodes  from  which  data  was  collected  were  included; grounded  electrodes  or  those  that  became  noisy  during  the experiment  (per  notation  in  the  lab  notebook)  were  excluded. Using  a  custom  program  written  in  the  Python  programming language,  the  timestamps  data  were  imported  and  analyzed  using methods  based  on  Selinger  et  al.,  2004,  as  described  in  the following  paragraphs.  The  code  and  supporting  documentation  are available  by  request  (contact:  shafer.tim@epa.gov). Since  a  correlation  coefﬁcient  can  only  be  calculated  for  data  from time  intervals  of  equal  length,  the  series  of  timestamps  for  each electrode  was  converted  into  a  ‘‘binary  activity  signal’’.  To  generate this  binary  activity  signal,  the  timestamps  data  were  ﬁrst  divided into  sequential  bins  of  duration  Dt.  A  duration  of  0.5  s  was  chosen  for Dt  because  this  was  signiﬁcantly  longer  than  the  average  duration  of bursts  and  signiﬁcantly  shorter  than  the  average  time  between bursts.  Each  bin  in  the  binary  activity  signal  was  assigned  a  0  if  there were  no  timestamps  in  that  bin  or  a  1  if  there  was  at  least  one timestamp  in  that  bin  (Supplemental  Fig.  1).  This  binning  focused the  analysis  on  burst  synchrony  and  timestamps  outside  of  bursts, preventing  differences  in  individual  timestamps  within  bursts (which  are  insigniﬁcant  from  a  burst  synchrony  standpoint)  from overly  inﬂuencing  the  results  while  still  providing  sufﬁcient resolution  of  individual  bursts.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  method does  not  account  for  potential  shifts  or  jitter  in  ﬁring  (e.g.  Wu  et  al., 2011),  as  the  focus  is  on  burst  synchrony. For  each  pair  of  electrodes  in  the  array,  a  correlation  coefﬁcient was  calculated  for  their  binary  activity  signals  using  the  formula ! # N X t¼ x jðtÞ " ri  j ¼  N N X xiðtÞx jðtÞ  (cid:5) (cid:2)  N

(cid:2)  N t¼ N X xiðtÞ2 (cid:5) N X xiðtÞ t¼ t¼ N X x jðtÞ2 (cid:5) t¼ N X x jðtÞ t¼ ! N X xiðtÞ t¼ !

(cid:5)1=

(cid:5)1= !

C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75–

where  rij is  the  correlation  coefﬁcient,  N  is  the  number  of  bins  in  the binary  activity  signal,  xi(t)  is  the  value  of  the  binary  activity  signal for  the  ﬁrst  electrode  at  bin  t,  and  xj(t)  is  the  value  of  the  binary activity  signal  for  the  second  electrode  at  bin  t  (Selinger  et  al., 2004).  Electrodes  with  no  activity  or  activity  in  every  bin  for  a complete  interval  of  analysis  were  disregarded  from  the  analysis because  correlation  coefﬁcients  cannot  be  calculated  for  such  data. A  histogram  was  plotted  for  the  list  of  correlation  coefﬁcients for  each  interval  for  each  MEA.  These  histograms  could  be examined  for  shifts  to  the  right  or  left  (increasing  or  decreasing shifts  in  synchrony,  respectively)  between  applications  of  chemi- cals.  In  the  example  histograms  in  Supplemental  Fig.  2,  an  increase in  correlation  compared  to  baseline  activity  is  observed  after treatment  with  bicuculline  and  Schering  50911.  The  arithmetic mean  and  standard  error  of  the  correlation  coefﬁcients  were  also calculated  for  each  network  (MEA).  It  should  be  noted  that  this method  determines  overall  synchrony  across  the  network,  and  that synchrony  ‘‘locally’’  between  adjacent  electrodes  may  be  higher than  the  network  average. Identifying  chemical  similarity  through  pattern  recognition:  The combined  bursting,  spiking,  and  synchrony  values  were  compiled for  the  PCA.  A  single  mean  value  for  each  parameter  was  obtained from  each  chip  and  chemical  concentration  combination  and standardized  to  the  chip  control  (baseline  activity).  For  each  chip and  concentration  pair,  electrodes  were  removed  if  there  was  no bursting  activity  (usually  grounded  channels)  or  if  any  parameter value  was  10  times  larger  than  the  mean  for  the  chip/concentra- tion,  as  such  data  indicated  a  noisy  electrode.  Prior  to  performing PCA  on  the  dataset,  groups  of  parameters  with  Pearson  correlation coefﬁcients  greater  than  0.95  were  reduced  to  a  single  parameter. Additionally,  using  a  random  forest  (randomForest  package  in  R: Liaw  et  al.,  Liaw  and  Wiener,  2002)  with  10,000  trees  was  used  to identify  the  variables  that  are  the  most  predictive  in  classifying  the chemicals  as  demonstrating  an  increasing,  decreasing,  or  un- changed  MFR  (for  concentrations  above  the  EC50/IC50).  Based  on the  Strong  Law  of  Large  Numbers  (Brieman,  2001)  ,  the  use  of 10,000  trees  in  the  random  forest  algorithm  is  robust  to  overﬁtting when  using  a  large  number  of  trees.  From  the  categorization, parameters  with  low  mean  decrease-accuracy  indices  (less  than 0.015)  were  not  utilized  for  further  analyses.  Finally,  for  controls and  chemicals  that  did  not  change  activity  enough  to  determine  an EC50 value,  data  from  the  entire  concentration  range  was  utilized for  PCA.  For  all  other  chemicals,  only  data  from  treatment concentrations  greater  than  the  mean  EC50 values  for  MFR  for each  chemical  were  used  for  PCA,  as  data  for  concentrations  below the  EC50 may  not  change  activity  sufﬁciently  from  control  to  aid  in separation. Each  principal  component  (PC)  is  the  linear  combination  of  the input  parameters  that  minimizes  the  remaining  variability  in  the dataset.  These  are  readily  calculated  through  singular  vector decomposition  using  the  FactoMineR  R  package  (Husson  et  al., 2012).  Once  the  PCs  are  determined,  values  for  data  points (identiﬁed  by  chip  and  chemical  concentration)  can  be  evaluated for  each  PC.  The  entire  dataset  can  be  quickly  visualized  by  plotting these  values  against  the  PCs  as  the  axes.  Similar  values  indicate similar  responses  in  activity  for  the  particular  experiment.  To illustrate  the  overall  chemical  responses,  data  were  condensed  to single  points  for  each  chemical  by  taking  an  arithmetic  mean  for each  PC.  Further,  95%  conﬁdence  ellipses  were  drawn  around chemicals  in  the  space  given  by  the  ﬁrst  two  principal  components, offering  a  deﬁnitive  way  to  classify  separation  of  classes  by considering  ellipse  overlap. A  C-classiﬁcation  SVM  was  conducted  on  the  same  dataset  used for  PCA  (Dimitriadou  et  al.,  2011).  The  SVM  used  a  radial-basis kernel  with  a  gamma  value  of  1/7  (seven  parameters  were  used). The  SVM  was  used  to  generate  a  predictive  model  capable  of  using the  dataset the  data  to  identify  chemicals  that  had  a  ‘‘no  change’’,  ‘‘increased’’ or  ‘‘decreased’’  MFR  (Table  2).  The  10-fold  cross-validation  is  a standard  mechanism  for  model  analysis,  as  is  the  use  of  receiver- operating  characteristic  (ROC)  curves.  The  cross-validation  is  used to  calculate  the  model’s  accuracy  and  generalizability  and reproducibility.  Ten-fold  cross-validation  means  that  the  SVM software  divided  into  10  smaller  equal  sized subsamples.  The  SVM  is  trained  on  nine  of  the  subsamples,  and tested  against  the  remaining  one  subsample.  This  process  is repeated  until  each  subsample  has  been  used  as  the  test  set  ( times).  The  ROC  curves  are  a  visual  way  to  represent  the  results from  the  SVM.  Performance  of  the  SVM  was  measured  by  the overall  accuracy  of  prediction  as  well  as  by  receiver  operator characteristic  (ROC)  curves.  Classiﬁcation  of  the  training  data  was compared  to  the  true  category  (determined  by  chemical  applied)  to yield  an  overall  percent  accuracy.  Decision  values  can  be  used  to determine  false  and  true  positive  rates  for  each  pair  of  categories [increased/decreased,  increased/no  change,  no  change/decreased) to  the  model.  All calculations  were  done  in  R  v2.15.0  (R  Development  Core  Team (2012)]. the  power  of  categorization indicate in 3.  Results far The  data  analyzed  in  the  present  experiment  were  collected from  a  total  of  114  different  networks  (MEA  chips)  over  a  period  of 3  years  (mean  (cid:3)SEM)  of (2009–2011).  Overall,  46.0  (cid:3)  2.2%  electrodes  available  to  record  from  on  each  chip  were  ‘‘active’’ (>5  spikes/min)  and  the  mean  ((cid:3)SEM)  ﬁring  rate  of  these  cortical networks  was  128  (cid:3)  11  spikes/min.  The  use  of  DMSO  in  the  present experiments  did  not  exceed  a  maximum  of  0.7%  by  volume;  up  to  a concentration  of  1%  by  volume  did  not  alter  activity  of  cortical networks  (data  not  shown),  which  is  consistent  with  previously published  data  (Defranchi  et  al.,  2011).  Concentration–response relationships  were  determined  for  each  of  the  compounds,  and  could be  described  by  one  of  three  general  effects  on  the  MFR  (Fig.  2);  no change  (e.g.  nicotine),  increase  (e.g.  RDX),  or  decrease  (e.g.  carbaryl). Concentration–response  relationships  for  the  other  compounds  are provided  in  Supplemental  Figs.  3  and  4.  Four  of  the  ﬁve  compounds that  are  known  GABAA receptor  antagonists  (BIC,  PTX,  RDX,  LND) increased  MFR  in  a  concentration-dependent  manner,  although  PTX was  less  efﬁcacious  than  the  other  three.  At  the  highest concentrations  of  LND  and  PTX  tested,  MFR  decreased.  This  may  be due  to  over-stimulation  of  the  network  by  increased  glutamatergic input  (Frega  et  al.,  2012),  or  at  least  in  the  case  of  lindane,  insolubility (E.  Croom,  personal  communication)  or  potentially  actions  on voltage-gated  calcium  channels  (Heusinkveld  et  al.,  2010).  Three compounds  (GLY,  ACE  and  nicotine)  caused  no  substantial  changes  in MFR,  while  the  remaining  nine  compounds  (CARB,  CFO,  DA,  DM,  DMP, FLU,  FIP,  MUS,  VER,)  all  decreased  MFR.  Two  compounds  did  not  have the  expected  effects:  nicotine,  which  has  been  reported  by  others  to alter  activity  on  MEAs  (Defranchi  et  al.,  2011),  caused  only  slight decreases  in  activity  only  at  the  highest  concentrations.  DMP  caused concentration-dependent  decreases  in  MFR.  It  was  expected  that  this compound  would  not  alter  ﬁring  rate  due  to  the  lack  of  reported effects  on  neuronal  function  in  the  literature,  as  well  as  its  use  in  in vitro  assays  as  a  negative  control  (Breier  et  al.,  2008;  Radio  et  al., 2008).  For  all  other  compounds,  the  EC50 values  were  in  the  low nanomolar  to  low  micromolar  range  (Table  2),  consistent  with  the fact  that  these  are  compounds  known  to  be  neuroactive  or  neurotoxic. Analysis  of  network  synchrony  indicated  that  the  basal  level  of synchrony  across  all  networks  was  low  but  variable;  with  an overall  correlation  coefﬁcient  of  0.47  (cid:3)  0.20  (mean  (cid:3)s.d.;  N  =  114). Four  compounds  caused  less  than  a  10%  change  in  synchrony:  DMP, GLY,  DA  and  CAR.  Five  compounds  increased  synchrony,  and  four compounds  increased  network  synchrony  by  at  least  35%  (Table  3). C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– Fig.  3.  Example  concentration–response  curves  for  chemical  effects  on  network synchrony.  Illustrated  here  are  the  effects  of  Lindane  (top),  which  increased network  synchrony,  and  Muscimol  (bottom),  which  decreased  it.  Synchrony  of activity  was  calculated  for  each  experiment  and  data  are  the  means  and  SEM  of (lindane)  and  5  (muscimol)  separate  experiments.  The  highest  concentration  of lindane  decreased  both  MFR  and  synchrony,  possibly  due  to  solubility  issues.  This point  was  not  used  to  determine  EC50 values. Fig.  2.  Representative  effects  of  chemicals  on  mean  ﬁring  rate  (MFR)  of  cortical cultures  grown  on  microelectrode  arrays.  Following  collection  of  baseline  data, concentration–response  for  each  chemical  was  determined  by  cumulative  dosing. In  general,  chemical  effects  on  MFR  fell  into  one  of  three  categories;  no  change (Nicotine,  top),  increased  (RDX,  middle)  or  decreased  (Carbaryl,  bottom).  Data  from each  experiment  were  normalized  to  the  ﬁring  rate  during  baseline  for  that experiment  (MEA),  and  each  data  point  is  the  mean  and  SEM  (the  number  of individual  experiments  are  provided  in  Table  2  as  the  number  of  networks).  SEM values  for  baseline  points  represent  the  SEM  of  the  baseline  values  for  each experiment  relative  to  a  mean  baseline  value  for  all  experiments.  Plots  for  the remaining  13  chemicals  are  in  Supplemental  Figs.  3  and  4. Four  of  the  ﬁve  compounds  that  increased  synchrony  of  activity  were GABAA receptor  antagonists  (BIC,  PTX,  RDX  and  LND),  while  the  ﬁfth compound  was  nicotine.  Changes  in  synchrony  were  concentration- dependent  (Fig.  3),  and  in  general,  were  similar  to  changes  in  MFR. However,  this  was  not  always  the  case,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that DA  and  CAR,  which  cause  large  decreases  in  MFR,  did  not  change network  synchrony.  By  contrast,  PTX  and  NIC,  caused  similar increases  in  synchrony,  despite  producing  only  modest  or  no  change in  MFR,  respectively. 3.1.  Spontaneous  network  burst  activity Twelve  different  parameters  were  derived  from  the  burst analysis  (Section  2).  Many  of  the  parameters  extracted  from  the data  are  highly  correlated  (Pearson  correlation  coefﬁcient  >0.95) the from with  the  other  parameters  (i.e.,  most  likely  collinear);  thus  they  do not  provide  any  additional  information  that  would  help  separate the  chemicals.  Furthermore,  pre-processing  the  dataset  to  remove low  information  variables  will  have  the  net  beneﬁt  of  decreasing the  overall  dataset  size  and  complexity,  which  will  decrease analysis  times  when  using  more  complicated  machine  learning methods,  and  will  enhance  the  ability  to  interpret  the  results.  The parameters  that  were  removed  from  the  analysis  were  all mathematically  derived  included  parameters.  The removed  parameters  were:  mean  frequency  (correlated  with  the number  of  spikes),  number  of  bursts  (correlated  with  burst  per minute),  and  mean  spikes  in  burst  (correlated  with  burst  duration). In  order  to  identify  those  parameters  that  provided  the  most information  regarding  chemical  separation,  a  random  forest analysis  was  conducted  using  effects  on  ﬁring  rate  (up,  down, no  change)  as  a  discriminator  (Table  4).  Parameters  with  low  mean decrease-accuracy  indices  (less  than  0.015)  removed  on  the  basis of  the  random  forest  analysis  included  mean  ISI  in  burst  (inversely proportional  to  mean  spikes  in  bursts),  mean  interburst  interval (inversely  proportional  to  number  of  bursts  and  bursts  per minute),  and  mean  peak  frequency.  The  remaining  parameters values  for  concentrations  above  the  chemical  EC50 were  included in  the  PCA.  The  MFR  and  synchrony  were  also  added  to  the parameters  that  were  considered  for  the  PCA.  The  ﬁrst,  second,  and third  principal  components  each  accounted  for  67.5,  19.7,  and  6.9% of  the  variance,  respectively.  The  ﬁrst  principal  component accounts  for  frequency  of  bursts–such  as  bursts  per  minute  and spike  rate.  the  second  principal  component,  decreasing In

C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75–

Table Synchrony  of  network  activity. Chemical Baseline  synchronya Conc.  (mM) ACE  BIC  DMP  FLU  GLY  LND  MUS  PTX  RDX  VER  CPO  DA  DELT  FIP  CAR  NIC 0.36  (cid:3)  0. 0.53  (cid:3)  0. 0.26  (cid:3)  0. 0.50  (cid:3)  0. 0.45  (cid:3)  0. 0.38  (cid:3)  0. 0.65  (cid:3)  0. 0.32  (cid:3)  0. 0.57  (cid:3)  0. 0.64  (cid:3)  0. 0.51  (cid:3)  0. 0.42  (cid:3)  0. 0.30  (cid:3)  0. 0.53  (cid:3)  0. 0.43  (cid:3)  0. 0.48  (cid:3)  0.

0. 0.

Changeb (cid:5)0.04  (cid:3)  0. 0.15  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.01  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.21  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.03  (cid:3)  0. 0.26  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.23  (cid:3)  0. 0.15  (cid:3)  0. 0.08  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.24  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.12  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.07  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.21  (cid:3)  0. (cid:5)0.40  (cid:3)  0. 0.01  (cid:3)  0. 0.07  (cid:3)  0. Percent  controlc 79.4  (cid:3)  27.7% 141.2  (cid:3)  17.0% 99.1  (cid:3)  9.9% 57.5  (cid:3)  18.4% 94.1  (cid:3)  14.1% 257.7  (cid:3)  90.2% 65.9  (cid:3)  20.4% 145.2  (cid:3)  10.2% 114.4  (cid:3)  8.2% 59.6  (cid:3)  12.5% 78.4  (cid:3)  8.2% 90.4  (cid:3)  29.5% 24.7  (cid:3)  15.7% 22.7  (cid:3)  20.9% 101.5  (cid:3)  4.3% 138.1  (cid:3)  26.2% a Mean  values  for  network  synchrony  in  the  absence  of  treatment. b Mean  net  change  in  network  synchrony  at  the  concentration  of  chemical  indicated  in  the  ‘‘Conc.’’  column. c Mean  percent  control  for  changes  in  network  synchrony  (synchrony  at  the  indicated  concentration/synchrony  baseline  (cid:2)  100).  Values  are  the  means  and  SEMs  for  3– individual  experiments  (MEA  chips).  Most  synchrony  changes  in  the  presence  of  chemical  were  correlated  to  the  change  in  MFR.  However,  while  DMP,  and  CAR  decrease  MFR, they  did  not  have  the  same  effect  on  network  synchrony. percentage  of  spikes  in  burst  and  increases  in  spike  and  spike  rate account  for  the  majority  of  the  variance  (Fig.  4). In  the  plot  of  PCA  barycenters,  GABAA receptor  antagonists  RDX, BIC,  and  LND  clustered  together  positively  in  the  ﬁrst  principal second  and  third  principal  components  (Fig.  5).  Although  the  95% conﬁdence  ellipse  for  LND  is  not  as  tight  as  those  for  RDX  and  BIC, the  95%  conﬁdence  ellipses  for  these  compounds  overlap  in  the ﬁrst  and  second  as  well  as  the  ﬁrst  and  third  components (Supplemental  Fig.  5).  This  clustering  reﬂects  the  fact  that  these chemicals  increase  bursting  at  higher  concentrations,  while  spikes within  the  bursts  decreased  (Fig.  4). GLY,  NIC  and  PTX  also  formed  a  small  cluster  (Fig.  5)  where  the 95%  conﬁdence  ellipses  (Supplemental  Fig.  5)  separated  from  all other  chemicals  except  DELT  and  FLU.  There  were  also  small clusters  formed  by  some  of  the  remaining  chemicals.  However, there  was  also  overlap  in  the  95%  conﬁdence  ellipses  for  many  of these  chemicals  (Supplemental  Fig.  5).  Carbaryl,  MUS,  and  CPO were  negative  in  the  ﬁrst  and  second  principal  components  but near  zero  in  the  third  component,  thus  forming  a  small  cluster (Fig.  5).  As  expected,  these  chemicals  decreased  bursting,  but tended  to  increase  the  percentage  of  spikes  within  bursts. Verapamil,  FIP,  DELT  and  DMP  clustered  negatively  in  PC1  and and  PC3,  but  near  the  PC2  axis  from  their  decreases  in  bursting  and spiking  activity.  FLU  and  DA  were  intermediate  in  the  space between  the  cluster  formed  by  GLY,  PTX  and  NIC  and  that  of  FIP, VER,  DELT  and  DMP.  Finally,  the  barycenter  for  ACE  was  very  close to  the  control  barycenter. Table Random  forest  analysis  resultsa. Parameter Mean  decrease  accuracy  ((cid:3)st.  dev) %  of  channels  with  bursts  Spikes  Bursts  per  minute  ‘%  of  All  Spikes  within  a  Burst  Mean  burst  duration  Mean  ISI  in  burst  Mean  Peak  Freq  in  bursts  Mean  interburst  interval  Spike  rate  Synchrony 0.023  (cid:3)  0. 0.050  (cid:3)  0. 0.060  (cid:3)  0. 0.0180  (cid:3)  0. 0.0120  (cid:3)  0. 0.010  (cid:3)  0. 0.011  (cid:3)  0. 0.011  (cid:3)  0. 0.115  (cid:3)  0. 0.060  (cid:3)  0. aMean  decrease  accuracy  index  with  standard  deviation  from  random  forest analysis  conducted  on  bursting  parameters.  RFA  was  used  to  classify  chemicals  as causing  increases  (up)  no  change  or  decreases  (down),  in  MFR. 3.2.  Support  vector  machine  (SVM)  results On  the  input  dataset,  SVM  correctly  predicted  chemical  class  of a  particular  concentration  on  a  chip  using  10-fold  cross-validation, with  a  mean  accuracy  of  83.8  (cid:3)  7.4%  (mean  accuracy  (cid:3)  s.d.,  N  =  10) and  overall  correct  classiﬁcation  rate  of  86.6%.  A  mean  accuracy  of 33.33%  is  expected  due  to  random  chance,  thus  the  SVM  model  is predicting  outcomes  with  an  accuracy  much  greater  than  chance.  A total  of  258  support  vectors  were  used  (104  in  ‘‘Decrease’’,  76  in ‘‘Neutral’’,  and  78  in  ‘‘Increase’’).  The  table  of  numbers  of  predicted categories  compared  to  the  original  classes  is  included  in  Table  5, while  the  accuracy  for  prediction  on  individual  chemicals  is  provided in  Table  6.  While  a  large  majority  of  the  current  dataset  was  predicted Table Support  vector  machine  results. Predicted Decrease  Neutral  Increase Actual Decrease

Table Accuracy  of  SVM  for  individual  chemicals. Accuracy  (%) ACE  BIC  CAR  CPO  DA  DELT  DMP  FIP  FLU  GLY  LND  MUS  NIC  PTX  RDX  VER 92. 80. 87. 88. 100. 93. 62. 86. 50. 40. 100. 76. 91. 85. 94. 100. Neutral Increase

N

Table  of  chemical  performance  in  SVM.  Accuracy  is  measured  as  a  percentage  of  the number  of  experiments  predicted  correctly.  N  is  the  number  of  experiments,  or  the number  of  unique  chips  and  concentration  pairs  for  the  chemical  above  the  IC value. C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– Fig.  5.  Plot  of  all  chemical  barycenters  in  PC1,  PC2  and  PC3.  BIC,  RDX  and  LND  clearly separate  from  the  other  chemicals  in  the  ‘‘back’’  left  side  of  the  ﬁgure.  While  the conﬁdence  limits  of  remaining  chemicals  overlap,  CPO,  CAR  and  MUS  form  a  group of  chemicals  that  is  located  in  the  ‘‘front’’  right  side  of  the  ﬁgure,  and  VER,  DLT,  DMP and  FLU  form  a  group  of  chemicals  in  the  ‘‘front’’  lower  portion  of  the  ﬁgure.  Overall, 94.1%  of  the  total  variance  is  accounted  for  by  the  ﬁrst  three  components  (PC1,  PC and  PC3)  of  the  PCA.  In  this  ﬁgure,  ‘‘control’’  (solid  square)  is  the  baseline  data  for  all experiments  used  in  the  PCA  across  all  chemicals.  Chemicals  that  increased  MFR  are shown  as  solid  circles,  while  those  that  decreased  MFR  are  open  circles.  Those  that were  without  effects  on  MFR  (EC50 >500  mM)  are  shown  as  solid  triangles. The  receiver  operating  characteristic  (ROC)  curves  show  the pairwise  true  positive  rate  (the  number  of  true  positives  that  are correctly  classiﬁed  divided  by  the  total  number  of  samples) compared  to  the  false  positive  rate  (the  number  of  incorrectly classiﬁed  divided  by  the  total  number  of  samples)  for  each  pair  of classes  (Fig.  6). The  ROC  curve  shows  how  a  model  performs  in  correctly classifying  items.  Random  chance  classiﬁcations  would  be depicted  as  a  straight  line  through  the  origin,  with  equal  true positive  and  false  positive  rates,  and  an  area  under  the  curve  of 0.50.  AUC  values  for  each  pair  of  classes  were  0.96,  0.96,  and  0. for  Neutral/Decrease,  Neutral/Increase,  and  Increase/Decrease, respectively.  In  all  cases,  the  model  performs  better  than  random when  discriminating  chemicals  that  have  increased  or  decreased activity  (‘‘up’’  or  ‘‘down’’,  respectively)  from  neutral  chemicals, with  only  minimal  differences  in  being  able  to  discriminate between  the  different  pairs  of  classes. 4.  Discussion The  present  studies  utilized  a  ‘‘data  mining’’  approach  to  test proof-of-concept  for  chemical  classiﬁcation  approaches  for  MEA data.  Concentration–response  relationships  for  16  chemicals  on spontaneous  activity  in  cortical  networks  demonstrated  three distinct  classes  of  effect  on  the  network  MFR;  increased,  decreased and  no  change.  These  results  conﬁrm  previous  studies  demon- strating  that  MEA  approaches  be  utilized  to  detect  neuroactive/ neurotoxic  substances  (Johnstone  et  al.,  2010;  Defranchi  et  al., 2011;  McConnell  et  al.,  2012)  as  effects  on  MFR  in  the  current  set  of experiments  were  consistent  with  previous  data  (Table  2). Analysis  of  network  synchronization  and  burst  characteristics  in the  presence  of  these  chemicals  demonstrated  further  differences between  groups  of  chemicals,  such  as  increased  synchronization observed  in  the  presence  of  GABAA receptor  antagonists.  When  all of  these  data  were  considered  together  using  a  PCA  and  SVM Fig.  4.  Variables  factor  map  for  PCA.  Contributions  of  ﬁring  and  bursting  parameters to  the  ﬁrst  three  principal  components.  The  horizontal  and  vertical  axes  represent the  ﬁrst  and  second  (top)  or  ﬁrst  and  third  (bottom)  principal  components, respectively.  Each  principal  component  represents  the  amount  of  the  variation  in the  dataset  that  is  noted  in  the  parentheses.  Each  variable  is  represented  by  a  vector in  the  map,  and  the  length  and  direction  (positive/negative)  of  the  vector  represents the  degree  to  which  the  axes  explain  the  variable.  For  example,  bursts/minute contributes  strongly  to  the  variability  in  PC1,  but  much  less  so  in  PC2,  while  spikes, spike  rate  and  %  of  spikes  in  burst  all  contribute  to  variability  in  PC1  and  PC2,  the  % of  spikes  in  bursts  contributes  in  the  opposite  direction  in  PC2  from  the  other variables.  Spatially,  coordinates  of  the  individuals  can  be  visualized  by  the  value  of the  parameters  plotted  against  the  parameter  vector  in  the  ﬁgure. correctly,  misclassiﬁed  experiments  were  not  distributed  equally across  chemicals.  DA,  LND,  and  VER  were  predicted  with  100% accuracy,  but  there  was  some  difﬁculty  predicting  FLU  and  GLY, which  had  the  lowest  percentage  of  experiments  predicted  correctly. Fluoxetine  had  primarily  been  predicted  incorrectly  as  neutral  for concentrations  between  100  nM  and  5  mM.  Because  the  EC50 values were  based  on  mean  concentration–response  curves,  it  is  possible that  individual  experiments  had  varying  EC50 values,  allowing  the inclusion  of  data  that  had  not  begun  decreasing  MFR  at  the  particular concentration  yet.  This  is  consistent  with  the  prediction  errors  mostly in  the  lower  concentrations  above  the  EC50,  but  no  error  at  the  highest two  concentrations  at  10  and  100  mM.  Glyphosate  was  predicted  as increasing  in  experiments  from  only  one  of  the  three  chips  used,  thus additional  data  is  needed  to  determine  the  overall  performance  of  GLY in  SVM.  Interestingly,  in  the  class  of  increasing  MFR,  it  seemed  that PTX  performed  as  well  or  better  than  BIC,  despite  being  closer  to  the controls  in  PCA.  PTX  was  only  misclassiﬁed  at  the  highest  two concentrations  (5,  10  mM),  while  concentrations  of  misclassiﬁed  BIC ranged  from  500  nM  to  50  mM.

C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75–

Overall,  the  PCA  identiﬁed  four  general  clusters  of  chemicals. The  ﬁrst,  which  included  the  GABAA antagonists  LND,  BIC  and  RDX, consisted  of  compounds  that  caused  clear  increases  in  MFR  and bursts  per  minute.  This  cluster  separated  most  clearly  from  the others  based  on  95%  conﬁdence  limits.  The  second  cluster consisted  of  GLY,  NIC  and  PTX,  which  separate  completely  from all  chemicals  except  for  DELT  and  FLU.  These  chemicals  were  less effective  at  altering  MFR,  but  altered  other  burst  parameters.  The third  cluster  was  formed  by  VER,  DELT,  DMP  and  FIP;  all  chemicals that  decreased  most  of  the  parameters  used  in  this  study.  The fourth  cluster  consists  of  two  cholinesterase  inhibitors,  CPO,  and CAR,  as  well  as  the  GABA  receptor  agonist,  MUS.  Separation  of  these last  two  clusters  is  not  clear,  as  there  is  overlap  between  the conﬁdence  intervals.  The  barycenter  for  ACE  was  very  close  to  the control  barycenter,  indicating  that  this  chemical  was  without effect  on  most  parameters  and  is  a  good  negative  control  chemical for  both  MFR  and  burst  characteristics. Overall  the  SVM  was  able  to  correctly  classify  experiments  into the  three  effects  classes  based  on  MFR  with  86.6%  accuracy.  This also  supports  the  proof-of-concept  that  MEA  data  can  be  used  to separate  chemicals  by  effects  class.  Because  of  the  small  size  of  the dataset,  only  three  classes  were  used  for  the  current  SVM.  As  larger datasets  become  available,  the  number  of  classes  in  the  SVM  can  be expanded,  including  potency  estimates.  An advantage  of  SVM  models  is  that  new  data  can  be  incorporated into  the  model  and  the  category  of  response  can  be  predicted,  such that  effects  of  a  previously  uncharacterized  chemical  can  be classiﬁed  with  other  chemicals  that  have  similar  effects. for  example,  by GABAA receptor  antagonists  were  the  largest  single  class  of compounds  in  this  set  of  16  chemicals,  yet  only  three  (BIC,  RDX  and LND)  of  these  compounds  clustered  together.  These  GABAA antagonists  typically  cause  seizures  in  vivo,  and  the  present  data indicate  that  MEAs  recordings  may  be  able  to  reliably  detect  and separate  seizurigenic  compounds  from  those  with  other  types  of effects.  Four  of  ﬁve  GABAA antagonists  (BIC,  RDX,  LND,  PTX)  caused concentration-dependent  increases  in  synchrony,  while  FIP  de- creased  it.  Picrotoxin-induced  increases  in  synchrony  in  neuronal networks  were  comparable  to  those  induced  by  BIC  (Table  3), therefore  differences  in  other  parameters  must  account  for  its  lack  of clustering  with  BIC,  LND  and  RDX.  Although  other  differences  may also  exist,  one  clear  difference  is  the  overall  efﬁcacy  of  PTX  to increase  ﬁring  rate,  which  was  much  lower  ((cid:6)120%  of  control)  than for  BIC,  LND  and  RDX  ((cid:6)250–400%  of  control).  Fipronil,  which  also binds  to  (Kamijima  and  Casida,  2000)  and  inhibits  mammalian (Ikeda  et  al.,  2001)  GABAA receptors,  decreased  ﬁring  rate,  bursting rate,  and  synchrony.  The  results  with  ﬁpronil  are  consistent  with previous  results  wherein  it  decreased  weighted  MFR  in  a  single concentration  screen  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012).  This  lack  of  excitatory action  of  ﬁpronil  appears  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  other  GABAA antagonists.  However,  ﬁpronil  binding  to  vertebrate  GABAA receptors  is  several  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  for  insect receptors,  and  metabolites  of  ﬁpronil  have  higher  afﬁnities  for binding  to  (Hainzl  et  al.,  1998)  and  inhibiting  (Zhao  et  al.,  2005)  the receptor  than  does  the  parent  compound.  Furthermore,  in  vivo studies  indicate  that  ﬁpronil  toxicity  in  vertebrates  is  not  well correlated  with  inhibition  of  speciﬁc  binding  of  the  GABAA antagonist  ethynylbicycloorthobenzoate  (EBOB),  even  at  seizure- inducing  doses  (Kamijima  and  Casida,  2000)  .  Fipronil  is  a  non- competitive  antagonist  of  EBOB  binding  (Cole  et  al.,  1993)  and  does not  share  a  common  site  with  picrotoxinin  (Ikeda  et  al.,  2001).  Thus, it  does  not  interact  with  the  GABAA receptor  in  the  same  manner  as do  the  other  compounds.  It  is  possible  that  the  effects  of  FIP  in  the present  study  are  not  the  result  of  interactions  of  this  compound with  the  GABAA receptor  but  are  instead  due  to  non-speciﬁc  effects of  this  compound.  This  hypothesis  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the PCA  separated  ﬁpronil  from  the  other  GABAA antagonists. Fig.  6.  Receiver–operator  curves  (ROC)  from  support  vector  machine  analysis.  ROC curves  are  provided  for  each  pair  of  classiﬁers.  The  true  positive  rate  is  the  number of  true  positives  that  are  correctly  classiﬁed  (e.g.,  classifying  as  ‘‘up’’  when  it  should be  ‘‘up’’)  divided  by  the  total  number  of  samples.  The  false  positive  rate  is  the number  of  false  positives  (up  or  down)  that  are  incorrectly  classiﬁed  (e.g., classifying  as  ‘‘up’’  when  it  should  be  ‘‘down’’)  divided  by  the  total  number  of samples.  Random  chance  classiﬁcations  would  be  depicted  as  a  straight  line through  the  origin,  with  equal  true  positive  and  false  positive  rates,  and  an  area under  the  curve  of  0.50.  The  corresponding  areas  under  the  curve  (AUC)  measures are  (a)  0.96,  (b)  0.96,  and  (c)  0.97  for  Neutral/Decrease,  Neutral/Increase,  and Increase/Decrease,  respectively.  These  values  demonstrate  that  in  all  cases  the model  performs  much  better  than  random  chance. approaches,  the  results  demonstrated  that  some  GABAA antago- nists  clearly  separate  from  other  compounds  in  the  PCA,  and  that SVM  reliably  predicts  three  effects  classes  determined  on  the  basis of  the  data.  In  addition,  there  are  trends  toward  separation  of  other compounds  in  the  PCA.  Considering  the  small  dataset,  these  results provide  proof-of-concept  such approaches  may  be  useful  to  categorize  previously  uncharacter- ized  compounds  (‘‘unknowns’’)  into  effect  classes. improvements, that,  with C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75– The  chemical  barycenters  of  other  classes  of  compounds  also showed  clustering  in  the  PCA,  although  the  overlaps  of  95% conﬁdence  limits  indicted  that  they  were  not  completely  separat- ed.  The  acetylcholinesterase  inhibitors  chlorpyrifos  oxon  and carbaryl  grouped  close  to  each  other  and  away  from  other  classes of  compounds.  Interestingly,  muscimol,  a  GABAA receptor  agonist also  clusters  closely  with  these  two  compounds,  a  reﬂection  of  the ability  of  all  three  of  these  compounds  to  decrease  bursting,  but  to increase  the  percentage  of  spikes  within  bursts. Nicotine  was  without  effect  on  MFR  in  the  current  experiments. This  compound  has  been  reported  by  others  (Defranchi  et  al., 2011)  to  alter  MFR,  but  its  lack  of  effect  here  is  consistent  with other  data  published  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012)  and  preliminary  data (Valdivia  et  al.,  2013)  from  our  laboratory.  Interestingly,  in  the  PCA nicotine’s  barycenter  along  with  GLY  and  PTX,  separates  from  the other  compounds  despite  their  having  little  effect  on  MFR.  Two  of these  compounds  (NIC  and  PTX)  increased  synchrony,  while  GLY was  without  effect  on  this  parameter  (Table  3).  The  variable factors  map  indicated  that  an  increase  in  the  percentage  of  spikes occurring  in  a  burst  and  a  decrease  in  spikes  and  spike  rate  are primarily  responsible  the  same for  compounds  quadrant  of  the  PCA  space  as  nicotine.  Indeed,  nicotine,  even  as low  as10  mM,  slightly  increased  the  percent  of  spikes  in  a  burst from  34.2  (cid:3)  8.3  (mean  (cid:3)SEM,  N  =  9)  in  control  to  35.9  (cid:3)  5.2  (N  =  9) and  decreased  the  number  of  spikes  and  spike  rate  from  972  (cid:3)  283  to 646  (cid:3)  140  and  84  (cid:3)  15  to  66  (cid:3)  11,  respectively.  Similar  changes  also occurred  at  higher  concentrations  of  nicotine.  Conﬁrmation  of  this result  with  other  nicotinic  compounds  is  needed,  but  one  advantage of  considering  other  endpoints  besides  MFR  may  be  that  compounds like  nicotine  which  are  without  effects  on  MFR,  can  be  detected. locating in While  the  present  study  is  promising  and  provides  a  proof-of- concept  for  compound  ‘‘ﬁngerprinting’’  using  MEA  data,  it  is  not without  limitations  and  will  require  improvements  to  reliably separate  classes  of  chemicals  beyond  GABAA antagonists.  This  set of  16  drugs  and  chemicals  contained  representative  chemicals from  many  different  classes,  but  the  number  of  compounds  from any  given  class  were  limited.  GABAA antagonists  were  the  most abundant  class  with  ﬁve  compounds  tested,  and  two  different cholinesterase  inhibitors  were  tested,  but  these  were  comprised  of one  each  of  an  organophosphate  (chlorpyrifos)  and  carbamate (carbaryl).  Otherwise,  the  list  of  compounds  tested  consisted  of  a single  representative  from  nine  additional  classes.  One  class  of chemical  lacking  from  this  set  of  chemicals  was  a  compound  that increased  MFR  but  was  not  a  GABAA antagonist  (for  example, glutamate  or  NMDA;  see  Frega  et  al.,  2012),  which  could  have helped  to  determine  how  well  the  GABAA antagonists  separated from  other  compounds  that  increase  ﬁring.  Furthermore,  while separation  of  three  of  the  GABAA antagonists  is  clear,  separation  of the  other  classes  of  compounds  is  not  as  robust,  as  the  95% conﬁdence  ellipses  overlap  for  these  compounds  (Supplemental Fig.  5).  In  order  for  these  approaches  to  provide  useful  classiﬁcation of  unknown  chemicals,  they  will  need  to  produce  clear  separation of  different  classes  of  known  chemicals.  The  overlap  is  driven  by the  variability  of  the  data,  which  may  be  inﬂuenced  by  several different  parameters.  Concentration–response  curves  were  col- lected  in  a  cumulative  manner,  thus  issues  such  as  intracellular accumulation  of  chemicals  and/or  receptor  desensitization  may contribute  to  variability  or  differences  between  chemicals.  This variability  could  be  decreased  either  by  including  more  replicates, or  preferably,  by  having  a  better  understanding  of  and  control  over experimental  conditions  that  contribute  to  variability.  For  exam- ple,  chip  to  chip,  day-to-day  and  culture-to-culture  differences may  all  contribute  to  variability.  This  may  in  part  be  improved through  the  use  of  multi-well  chips  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012). Additional  data,  both  in  terms  of  more  chemicals  from  each  class, as  well  as  deﬁning  other  parameters  (for  example,  temporal regularity  and  network  synchronization  (CVtime and  CVnet)  such  as used  by  Keefer  et  al.,  2001)  that  discriminate  between  chemical classes  will  also  improve  this  approach.  With  respect  to  the  latter, there  are  several  potential  metrics  that  could  be  informative, including  stimulus  induced  activity,  measurement  of  plasticity (Arnold  et  al.,  2005),  and/or  assessment  of  changes  to  the amplitude  or  duration  of  action  potentials.  Approaches  to  separate chemicals  may  also  beneﬁt  from  recent  improvements  in  the throughput  of  MEA  systems  to  include  12  (McConnell  et  al.,  2012) and  48  well  MEA  plates.  The  data  for  the  present  study  were collected  over  a  prolonged  period  of  time  and  from  numerous different  cultures.  Higher  throughput  MEA  systems  will  allow  for the  simultaneous  testing  of  many  chemicals  within  the  same  plate and/or  culture,  which  will  reduce  one  source  of  variability  for  these types  of  measurements  and  allow  for  many  more  chemicals  to  be tested.  Finally,  additional  data  to  help  deﬁne  compound  classes need  not  come  solely  from  MEA  recordings,  as  combination  of  MEA data  with,  for  example,  assays  from  the  EPA  ToxCast  dataset  may also  improve  classiﬁcation  schemes. There  are  also  other  data  analysis  approaches  that  could  also  be investigated  to  determine  whether  they  might  provide  better separation  of  different  chemical  classes  based  on  their  effects  on spontaneous  network  activity.  Spike  train  analysis  and  features selection  (Gramowski  et  al.,  2004)  have  previously  been  used  to classify  pharmaceutical  compounds  based  on  their  effects  on MEAs.  Additional  approaches  include  other  types  of  pattern recognition  methods,  such  as  k-means,  naı¨ve Bayes,  and  market- basket  approaches.  Applying  these  approaches  to  datasets  such  as present  here  will  be  necessary  to  evaluate  their  utility  and determine  the  best  approaches. Utilization  of  PCA  and  SVM  approaches  to  analyze  data  may  also have  other  applications.  For  example,  individual  or  particular groups  of  experiments  that  were  predicted  incorrectly  by  the model  can  be  identiﬁed  and  studied  to  improve  data  collection methods.  Incorrect  prediction  in  SVM  or  differences  identiﬁed  in PCA  may  also  issues  for  a  particular experiment,  providing  a  quality  control  check.  Finally,  it  should also  be  noted  that  PCA  and  SVM  could  be  applied  to  data  from  other toxicity  testing  approaches.  This  includes  high-content  imaging (Harrill  et  al.,  2011)  and  other  assays  where  multiple  parameters are  evaluated,  such  as  developmental  toxicity  studies  using zebraﬁsh  (Padilla  et  al.,  2011,  2012). identify  data  curation In  conclusion, the  present  results  demonstrate  proof-of- concept  that  chemicals  that  may  alter  neuronal  function  can  not only  be  detected  using  MEA  recording  approaches,  but  that  more comprehensive  consideration  of  the  data  from  such  recordings  can reveal  differences  in  chemicals  effects  that  can  be  separated  and classiﬁed.  Upon  reﬁnement  of  this  approach,  it  will  be  possible  to build  effects  databases  for  chemicals  with  known  mechanisms  of action,  which  will  then  help  to  identify  potential  modes  of  action for  uncharacterized  chemicals.  Future  studies  will  explore  this further  by  considering  additional  chemicals,  endpoints  for  analy- sis,  and  analysis  approaches. Conﬂicts  of  interest None. Acknowledgments The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Brian Robinette  in  preparing  cortical  cultures  on  the  MEAs.  In  addition, we  thank  Drs  William  LeFew  and  David  Herr  of  the  US  EPA  for constructive  comments  on  previous  versions  of  this  manuscript. Preparation  of  this  document  has  been  funded  by  the  U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency.  This  document  has  been reviewed  by  the  National  Health  and  Environmental  Effects

C.M.  Mack  et  al.  /  NeuroToxicology  40  (2014)  75–

Research  Laboratory  and  approved  for  publication.  Approval  does not  signify  that  the  contents  reﬂect  the  views  of  the  Agency,  nor does  mention  of  trade  names  or  commercial  products  constitute endorsement  or  recommendation  for  use.  BJL  and  JDT  were supported  in  part  through  the  EPA-Shaw  University  Research Apprenticeship  Program  for  High  School  Students  (Cooperative agreement  number  CR-83414001). Appendix  A.  Supplementary  data Supplementary  data  associated  with  this  article  can  be  found, the  online  version,  at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2013. in  11.008. References Arnold  FJ,  Hofmann  F,  Bengtson  CP,  Wittmann  M,  Vanhoutte  P,  Bading  H.  Microelec- trode  array  recordings  of  cultured  hippocampal  networks  reveal  a  simple  model for  J  Physiol 2005;564:3–19. synthesis-dependent  plasticity. transcription  and  protein Breier  J,  Radio  N,  Mundy  WR,  Shafer  TJ.  Development  of  a  high-throughput  assay  for assessing  antiproliferative  compounds  using  human  neuroprogenitor  cells.  Tox  Sci 2008;105:119–33. Brieman  L.  Random  Forests.  Mach  Learn  2001;45:5–32. Defranchi  E,  Novellino  A,  Whelan  M,  Vogel  S,  Ramirez  T,  van  Ravenzwaay  B,  Landsiedel R.  Feasibility  assessment  of  mirco-electrode  chip  assay  as  a  method  of  detecting neurotoxicity  in  vitro.  Front  Neuroeng  2011;4(6):1–12. Dimitriadou  E,  Hornik  K,  Leisch  F,  Meyer  D,  Weingessel  A.  e1071:  Misc  Functions  of  the Department  of  Statistics  (e1071),  TU  Wien.  R  package  version  1.6.  http://CRAN.R- project.org/package=e1071;  2011. Frega  M,  Pasquale  V,  Tedesco  M,  Marcoli  M,  Contestabile  A,  Nanni  M,  Bonzano  L,  Maura G,  Chippalone  M.  Cortical  cultures  coupled  to  micro-electrode  arrays:  a  novel approach  testing.  Neurotoxicol  Teratol 2012;34:116–27. in  vitro  excitotoxicity to  perform Gopal  K.  Neurotoxic  effects  of  mercury  on  auditory  cortex  networks  growing  on Teratol preliminary analysis.  Neurotoxicol arrays: a microelectrode  2003;25:69–76. Gramowski  A,  Schiffmann  D,  Gross  GW.  Quantiﬁcation  of  acute  neurotoxic  effects  of trimethyltin  using  neuronal  networks  cultures  on  microelectrode  arrays  Neuro- toxicology  2000;21:331–42. Gramowski  A,  Ju¨ gelt  K,  Weiss  DG,  Gross  GW.  Substance  identiﬁcation  by  quantitative characterization  of  oscillatory  activity  in  murine  spinal  cord  networks  on  micro- electrode  arrays.  Eur  J  Neurosci  2004;19:2815–25. Gross  GW,  Rhoades  BK,  Azzazy  HME,  Wu  M-C.  The  use  of  neuronal  networks  on multielectrode  arrays  as  biosensors.  Biosens  Bioelectron  1995;10:553–67. Hainzl  D,  Cole  LM,  Casida  JE.  Mechanisms  for  selective  toxicity  of  ﬁpronil  insecticide its  sulfone  metabolite  and  desulﬁnyl  photoproduct.  Chem  Res  Toxicol and  1998;11:1529–35. Harrill  JA,  Robinette  BL,  Mundy  WR.  Use  of  high  content  image  analysis  to  detect In  Vitro in  vitro.  Toxicol synaptogenesis changes in chemical-induced  2011;25:368–87. Heusinkveld  HJ,  Thomas  GO,  Lamot  I,  van  den  Berg  M,  Kroese  AB,  Westerink  RH.  Dual actions  of  lindane  (g-hexachlorocyclohexane)  on  calcium  homeostasis  and  exo- cytosis  in  rat  PC12  cells.  Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol  2010;248:12–9. Hogberg  HT,  Sobanski  T,  Novellino  A,  Whelan  M,  Weiss  DG,  Bal-Price  AK.  Application  of micro-electrode  arrays  (MEAs)  as  an  emerging  technology  for  developmental neurotoxicity:  evaluation  of  domoic  acid-induced  effects  in  primary  cultures  of rat  cortical  neurons.  Neurotoxicology  2011;32:158–68. Husson  F,  Josse  J,  Le  S,  Mazet  J.  FactoMineR:  Multivariate  Exploratory  Data  Analysis  and Data  Mining  with  R.  R  package  version  1.18.  http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=- FactoMineR;  2012. Ikeda  T,  Zhao  X,  Nagata  K,  Kono  Y,  Shono  T,  Yeh  JZ,  Narahashi  T.  Fipronil  modulation  of l-aminobutyric  acidA receptors  in  rat  dorsal  root  ganglion  neurons.  J  Pharmacol Exp  Ther  2001;296:914–21. Ingleﬁeld  JR,  Shafer  TJ.  Perturbation  by  the  PCB  mixture  aroclor  1254  of  GABA(A) receptor-mediated  calcium  and  chloride  responses  during  maturation  in  vitro  of rat  neocortical  cells.  Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol  2000;164:184–95. Kamijima  M,  Casida  JE.  Regional  modiﬁcation  of  [3H]ethynylbicycloorthobenzoate binding  of  mouse  brain  GABAA receptor  by  endosulfan,  ﬁpronil  and  avermectin B1a.  Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol  2000;163:188–94. Keefer  E,  Norton  S,  Boyle  N,  Talesa  V,  Gross  G.  Acute  toxicity  screening  of  novel  AChE inhibitors  using  neuronal  networks  on  microelectrode  arrays.  NeuroToxicol 2001;22:3–12. Johnstone  AFM,  Gross  GW,  Weiss  D,  Schroeder  O,  Shafer  TJ.  Use  of  microelectrode century.  Neurotoxicology in for  neurotoxicity the  21st testing arrays  2010;31:331–50. Liaw  A,  Wiener  M.  Classiﬁcation  and  regression  by  randomforest.  R  News  2002;2:18– 22. McConnell  ER,  McClain  MA,  Ross  J,  LeFew  WR,  Shafer  TJ.  Evaluation  of  multi-well microelectrode  arrays  for  neurotoxicity  screening  using  a  chemical  training  set. Neurotoxicology  2012;33:1048–57. Meyer  DA,  Carter  JM,  Johnstone  AFM,  Shafer  TJ.  Pyrethroid  modulation  of  spontaneous neuronal  excitability  and  neurotransmission  in  hippocampal  neurons  in  culture. Neurotoxicology  2008;29:213–25. Novellino  A,  Scelfo  B,  Palosaari  T,  Price  A,  Sobanski  T,  Shafer  T,  Johnstone  A,  Gross  G, Gramowski  A,  Schroeder  O,  Jugelt  K,  Chiappalone  M,  Benfenati  F,  Martinoia  S, Tedesco  M,  Defranchi  E,  D’Angelo  P,  Whelan  M.  Development  of  micro-electrode array  based  tests  for  neurotoxicity:  assessment  of  interlaboratory  reproducibility with  neuroactive  chemicals.  Front  Neuroeng  2011;4(4):1–14. NRC.  Toxicity  Testing  in  the  Twenty-First  Century:  A  Vision  and  a  Strategy.  Washing- ton,  D.C.:  The  National  Academies  Press,  2007. Padilla  S,  Hunter  DL,  Padnos  B,  Frady  S,  MacPhail  RC.  Assessing  locomotor  activity  in larval  zebraﬁsh:  inﬂuence  of  extrinsic  and  intrinsic  variables.  Neurotoxicol  Teratol 2011;33:624–30. Padilla  S,  Corum  D,  Padnos  B,  Hunter  DL,  Beam  A,  Houck  KA,  Sipes  N,  Kleinstreuer  N, Knudsen  T,  Dix  DJ,  Reif  DM.  Zebraﬁsh  developmental  screening  of  the  ToxCastTM Phase  I  chemical  library.  Reprod  Toxicol  2012;33:174–87. Parviz  M,  Gross  GW.  Quantiﬁcation  of  zinc  toxicity  using  neuronal  networks  on microelectrode  arrays.  Neurotoxicology  2007;28:520–31. Potter  SM,  DeMarse  TB.  A  new  approach  to  neural  cell  culture  for  long-term  studies.  J Neurosci  Methods  2001;110(1–2):17–24. Radio  N,  Breier  J,  Shafer  TJ,  Mundy  WR.  Development  of  a  high-throughput  assay  for assessing  neurite  outgrowth.  Tox  Sci  2008;105:106–18. R  Development  Core  Team.  R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing.  R Foundation  for  Statistical  Computing,  Vienna,  Austria.  ISBN  3-900051-07-0,  http:// www.R-project.org/;  2012. Rijal  SO,  Gross  GW.  Dissociation  constants  for  GABA(A)  receptor  antagonists  deter- mined  with  neuronal  networs  on  microelectrode  arrays.  J  Neurosci  Methods 2008;173(2):183–92. Robinette  BL,  Harrill  JA,  Mundy  WR,  Shafer  TJ.  In  vitro  assessment  of  developmental neurotoxicity:  use  of  microelectrode  arrays  to  measure  functional  changes  in neuronal  network  ontogeny.  Front  Neuroeng  2011;4:1. Scelfo  B,  Politi  M,  Reniero  F,  Palosaari  T,  Whelan  M,  Zaldı´var  JM.  Application  of multielectrode  array  (MEA)  chips  for  the  evaluation  of  mixtures  neurotoxicity. Toxicology  2012;299(2–3):172–83. Selinger  JV,  Pancrazio  JJ,  Gross  GW.  Measuring  synchronization  in  neuronal  networks for  biosensor  applications.  Biosens  Bioelectron  2004;19:675–83. Shafer  TJ,  Rijal  SO,  Gross  GW.  Complete  inhibition  of  spontaneous  activity  in  neuronal networks  in  vitro  by  deltamethrin  and  permethrin.  Neurotoxicology  2008;29:203– 12. Valdivia  P,  Martin  M,  LeFew  W,  Ross  J,  Houck  K,  Shafer  TJ.  Evaluation  of  the  neuroac- tivity  of  ToxCast  compounds  using  multiwell  microelectrode  array  recordings  of primary  cortical  neurons.  Abstract  #900.  The  Toxicol  2013;132(1)  [Society  of Toxicology  Annual  Meeting  Abstract  Available  online:  www.toxicology.org].. van  Vliet  E,  Stoppini  L,  Balestrino  M,  Eskes  C,  Griesinger  C,  Sobanski  T,  Whelan  M, Hartung  T,  Coecke  S.  Electrophysiological  recording  of  re-aggregating  brain  cell cultures  on  multi-electrode  arrays  to  detect  acute  neurotoxic  effects.  Neurotox- icology  2007;28:1136–46. Wu  W,  Wheeler  DW,  Pipa  G.  Bivariate  and  multivariate  NeuroXidence:  a  robust  and reliable  method  to  detect  modulations  of  spike-spike  synchronization  across experimental  conditions.  Front  Neuroinformatics  2011;5:14. Zhao  X,  Yeh  JZ,  Salgado  VL,  Narahashi  T.  Sulfone  metabolite  of  ﬁpronil  blocks  l- aminobutyric  acid-  and  glutamate-activated  chloride  channels  in  mammalian  and insect  neurons.  J  Pharmacol  Exp  Therap  2005;314:316–73.