Research Article
A Human iPSC-Based In Vitro Neural Network  
Formation Assay to Investigate 
Neurodevelopmental Toxicity of Pesticides
Kristina Bartmann1,2, Farina Bendt1, Arif Dönmez1,2, Daniel Haag3, H. Eike Keßel1, Stefan Masjosthusmann1, 
Christopher Noel3, Ji Wu3, Peng Zhou3 and Ellen Fritsche1,2,

1IUF – Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Duesseldorf, Germany; 2DNTOX GmbH, Duesseldorf, Germany; 3NeuCyte Inc.,  
Mountain View, CA, USA; 4Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany
Abstract
Proper brain development is based on the orchestration of key neurodevelopmental processes (KNDP), including the for-
mation and function of neural networks. If at least one KNDP is affected by a chemical, an adverse outcome is expected. 
To enable a higher testing throughput than the guideline animal experiments, a developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) in vitro 
testing  battery  (DNT  IVB)  comprising  a  variety  of  assays  that  model  several  KNDPs  was  set  up.  Gap  analysis  revealed 
the need for a human-based assay to assess neural network formation and function (NNF). Therefore, we established the 
human NNF (hNNF) assay. A co-culture comprised of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived excitatory and 
inhibitory neurons as well as primary human astroglia was differentiated for 35 days on microelectrode arrays (MEA), and 
spontaneous electrical activity, together with cytotoxicity, was assessed on a weekly basis after washout of the compounds 
24 h prior to measurements. In addition to the characterization of the test system, the assay was challenged with 28 com-
pounds, mainly pesticides, identifying their DNT potential by evaluation of specific spike-, burst-, and network parameters. 
This approach confirmed the suitability of the assay for screening environmental chemicals. Comparison of benchmark con-
centrations (BMC) with an NNF in vitro assay (rNNF) based on primary rat cortical cells revealed differences in sensitivity. 
Together  with  the  successful  implementation  of  hNNF  data  into  a  postulated  stressor-specific  adverse  outcome  pathway 
(AOP) network associated with a plausible molecular initiating event for deltamethrin, this study suggests the hNNF assay as 
a useful complement to the DNT IVB.
1  Introduction
The developing central nervous system is known to be more sensi-
tive to exposure to toxic agents than the adult equivalent (Rodier, 
1995). There is evidence that environmental chemicals contribute 
to neurodevelopmental disorders in children such as autism spec-
trum disorder, mental retardation, and cerebral palsy (NRC, 2000; 
Grandjean and Landrigan, 2006; Kuehn, 2010; Sagiv et al., 2010; 
Bennett et al., 2016).
Pesticides  belong  to  one  compound  class  that  is  demonstra-
bly associated with causing developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) 
(Bjørling-Poulsen et al., 2008). Today, only 35 of the 485 pesti-
cides currently approved in the EU have been tested in DNT stud-
ies  (Ockleford  et  al.,  2018). The  reason  for  this  lack  of  testing, 
which generally applies to all chemicals (Goldman and Koduru,
2000; Crofton et al., 2012), lies in the current DNT in vivo testing 
guidelines, i.e., the OECD 426 (OECD, 2007) and EPA 870.

(U.S. EPA, 1998) guidelines. Their high resource intensity regard-
ing time, money, and animals is a reason for the limited through-
put  of  these  studies  (Smirnova  et  al.,  2014).  Furthermore,  high 
variability and low reproducibility of in vivo experiments, as well 
as species differences, increase the uncertainty of in vivo guideline 
studies for DNT testing (Tsuji and Crofton, 2012; Terron and Ben-
nekou, 2018; Sachana et al., 2019; Paparella et al., 2020).
In the last years, scientists from academia, industry, and regula-
tory authorities across the world agreed on the need for a standard-
ized in vitro testing strategy, aiming for cheaper and faster gener-
ation of additional data for DNT hazard assessment (EFSA, 2013; 
Crofton et al., 2014; Bal-Price et al., 2015, 2018; Fritsche et al., 
2017, 2018a,b). Following this consensus, a DNT in vitro battery
Received June 3, 2022; Accepted April 24, 2023;    
Epub May 3, 2023; © The Authors, 2023.
ALTEX 40(3), 452-470. doi:10.14573/altex.

Correspondence: Ellen Fritsche, PhD 
IUF-Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine 
Auf’m Hennekamp

40225 Duesseldorf, Germany 
(ellen.fritsche@iuf-duesseldorf.de)

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution  4.0  International  license  (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), 
which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provi-
ded the original work is appropriately cited.

(IVB)  was  compiled,  which  includes  various  DNT  test  methods 
covering  different  neurodevelopmental  processes,  so-called  key 
events (KEs), and developmental stages to approximate the com-
plexity of human brain development (Fritsche, 2017; Fritsche et 
al., 2017; Bal-Price et al., 2018). Within this DNT IVB, neurode-
velopment is described by in vitro assays covering the following 
KEs:  human  neural  progenitor  cell  (hNPC)  proliferation  (Bau-
mann et al., 2014, 2015; Harrill et al., 2018; Nimtz et al., 2019; 
Masjosthusmann  et  al.,  2020;  Koch  et  al.,  2022)  and  apoptosis 
(Druwe et al., 2015; Harrill et al., 2018), cell migration (Baumann 
et al., 2015, 2016; Nyffeler et al., 2017; Schmuck et al., 2017; Mas-
josthusmann et al., 2020; Koch et al., 2022), hNPC-neuronal (Bau-
mann et al., 2015; Schmuck et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann et al., 
2020; Koch et al., 2022) and oligodendrocyte differentiation (Frit-
sche et al., 2015; Dach et al., 2017; Schmuck et al., 2017; Masjost-
husmann et al., 2020; Klose et al., 2021; Koch et al., 2022), neurite 
outgrowth (human: Harrill et al., 2010, 2018; Krug et al., 2013; 
Hoelting et al., 2016; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020; Koch et al., 
2022; rat: Harrill et al., 2013, 2018) as well as neuronal maturation 
and synaptogenesis (rat: Harrill et al., 2011, 2018).
Another  crucial  key  neurodevelopmental  process  represent-
ed within the DNT IVB is the formation and function of neural 
networks, since nervous system development requires functional 
networks consisting of different types of neurons and glial cells 
(Brown  et  al.,  2016;  Frank  et  al.,  2017;  Shafer,  2019).  Further-
more, certain brain disorders, like autism spectrum disorder, Alz-
heimer’s  and  Parkinson’s  disease,  are  associated  with  dysfunc-
tional neural synchronization (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006). Import-
ant tools to study electrophysiology of such neural networks are 
microelectrode  arrays  (MEA),  which  record  extracellular  local 
field potentials on multiple electrodes at different locations of the 
network and provide information on electrical activity, firing pat-
terns, and synchronicity of the neural networks (Johnstone et al., 
2010). So far, DNT in vitro testing for synaptogenesis and neuro-
nal  activity  is  mainly  performed  in  assays  based  on  rat  primary 
cortical cells (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017). The use of a 
human cell model to assess this endpoint has been identified as a 
gap in the current DNT IVB because the potential for species-spe-
cific features is still unknown (Crofton and Mundy, 2021).
The  introduction  of  human  induced  pluripotent  stem  cells  
(hiPSC)  (Takahashi  et  al.,  2007)  has  extensively  advanced  the 
field  of  biomedical  sciences  including  testing  for  DNT.  It  has 
been shown that hiPSC-derived neural networks growing directly 
on MEAs exhibit spontaneous neuronal activity with organized 
spiking and bursting patterns (Odawara et al., 2016; Ishii et al., 
2017; Nimtz et al., 2020; Tukker et al., 2020a; Bartmann et al., 
2021), which can be modulated with known neurotoxicants and
drugs  (Odawara  et  al.,  2018;  Nimtz  et  al.,  2020;  Tukker  et  al., 
2020b). The neural induction of hiPSCs towards functional neu-
ronal cultures comes with many advantages, especially with re-
gard to disease modelling, but bears the issue of high variability 
between batches and cell lines. This variability is mostly due to 
the  fact  that  every  neural  network  differentiates  into  a  variable 
number of neuronal subtypes. In addition, the generation of suffi-
ciently active networks takes weeks to months (Hofrichter et al., 
2017; Hyvärinen et al., 2019). The use of commercially available 
hiPSC-derived  neurons  with  quality-  and  cell  ratio-controlled, 
reproducible cells provided in large quantities circumvents these 
problems (Little et al., 2019).
In this study we present the establishment of a human neural 
network formation (hNNF) assay based on a commercially avail-
able  kit,  which  consists  of  hiPSC-derived  excitatory  and  inhib-
itory  neurons  and  primary  astroglia  (SynFire,  NeuCyte,  USA). 
Pharmacological modulation confirmed the functionality of both 
neuronal subtypes, and chronic treatment over 35 days revealed 
the  ability  of  the  cell  model  to  detect  alterations  by  bisindolyl-
maleimide I (Bis-I) via a known mode of action (MoA). The as-
say was challenged with a test set of 28 substances and displayed 
compound-specific effects on network development.
2  Materials and methods
Compounds
In the present study, 28 substances with different concerns regard-
ing their DNT potential were tested. The compounds are part of 
a training set used for the current DNT in vitro battery (Blum et 
al., 2022; Carstens et al., 2022). More information on compound 
selection  can  be  found  in  Masjosthusmann  et  al.  (2020). As  an 
assay  negative  control,  acetaminophen  was  included  in  the  test 
set. The  protein  kinase  C  (PKC)  inhibitor  Bis-I  was  used  as  an 
assay  positive  control,  together  with  bicuculline  (BIC)  and  cy-
anquixaline  (6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione;  CNQX)  for 
acute pharmacological treatment of networks. Bis-I is known to 
decrease neurite outgrowth and firing/bursting rates of rat neural 
networks  (Harrill  et  al.,  2011;  Robinette  et  al.,  2011),  whereas 
BIC  and  CNQX  are  GABAergic  and  glutamatergic  receptor  in-
hibitors,  respectively.  Compounds  were  dissolved  in  dimethyl 
sulfoxide  (DMSO)  or  water  to  a  stock  concentration  of  20  mM  
with exception of rotenone (100 mM), BIC (15 mM), and CNQX 
(30 mM). Applied concentrations ranged from 0.027 to 20 µM and 
0.0004 to 0.3 µM for rotenone. Bis-I was applied at 5 µM, BIC at 
3 µM, and CNQX at 30 µM. CAS registry numbers, suppliers, and 
further information are collected in Table S11.
1 doi:10.14573/altex.2206031s

Abbreviations  
AOP, adverse outcome pathway; AUC, area under the curve; AUNCC, area under normalized cross-correlation; BIC, bicuculline; Bis-I, bisindolylmaleimide I; BMC, benchmark 
concentration; BMR, benchmark response; CI, confidence interval; COV, coefficient of variation; CNQX, cyanquixaline; DIV, days in vitro; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide;  
DNT, developmental neurotoxicity; excitatory:inhibitory (ex:inh); FBS, fetal bovine serum; FPKM, fragments per kilobase per million; hiPSC, human induced pluripotent stem 
cells; iN, induced neuronal cells; iN:glia, induced neuronal and glial cells; MSE, most sensitive endpoint; LG, ligand-gated; MIE, molecular initiating event; NPC, neural  
progenitor cell; IVB, in vitro battery; KE, key event; KNDP, key neurodevelopmental process; MEA, microelectrode array; MoA, mode of action; NNF, neural network formation 
and function; PKC, protein kinase C; VG, voltage-gated

Fig. 1: Experimental setup of the human NNF assay
A co-culture of hiPSC-derived excitatory and inhibitory neurons and primary astroglia (NeuCyte, USA) was plated in a defined cell type  
ratio on 48-well MEA plates at DIV 0. Cultures were allowed to mature for 7 days before exposure to the test compounds. 24 h before 
the weekly recording of spontaneous electrical network activity on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 a washout of the respective compounds was 
performed. Additionally, cytotoxicity was assessed every week on DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31 three days after dosing. Created with BioRender.com.
Cell culture
SynFire glutamatergic neurons (Lot#000172 and 000131), Syn-
Fire  GABAergic  neurons  (Lot#000172  and  000131),  and  Syn-
Fire  astrocytes  (Lot#13029-050  and  00190820;  all  from  Neu-
Cyte,  USA)  were  thawed  and  cultured  according  to  the  manu-
facturer’s protocol. In short, all three cell types were thawed and 
resuspended in a defined ratio in supplemented seeding medium 
(NeuCyte), resulting in a co-culture consisting of induced neuro-
nal (iN) and glial cells (iN:glia). Cells were seeded at a density of 
270 x 103 cells/well (140 x 103 glutamatergic neurons, 60 x

GABAergic neurons, 70 x 103 astrocytes) on 48 well MEA plates 
(Axion M768-KAP-48) pre-coated with 0.1% polyethyleneimine 
and 20 µg/mL mouse laminin. This approach resulted in a cell 
type ratio of 52% glutamatergic neurons, 22% GABAergic neu-
rons, and 26% astroglia. The seeding was performed in a 50 µL 
droplet (270 x 103 cells/droplet) of supplemented seeding medi-
um (NeuCyte) per well. After cells were allowed to adhere for 
24 h, each well was filled with 250 µL supplemented short-term 
medium (NeuCyte). At days in vitro (DIV) 3 and 5, cells were fed 
by replacing half of the medium with supplemented short-term
medium. From DIV 7 onwards, medium was gradually changed 
to  supplemented  long-term  medium  (NeuCyte)  by  replacing 
half of the medium on DIV 7 and 10 until the medium was com-
pletely replaced at DIV 13 (washout). The short-term medium is 
supplemented with a substance that reduces the proliferation of 
astroglia.
Following the same plating procedure and seeding density,

wells  of  a  pre-coated  96-well  flat  bottom  plate  (Greiner)  were 
prepared for weekly cytotoxicity assessments.
Experimental design 
Following the first recording of spontaneous electrical network 
activity at DIV 7, cells were exposed to the respective test com-
pound  by  exchanging  half  of  the  medium  with  supplemented 
long-term  medium  containing  double-concentrated  compound. 
Half  medium  changes  with  the  compounds  were  conducted  at 
DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31. The removed medium was used for cy-
totoxicity  assessment  described  below.  24  h  before  weekly  re-
cordings at DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35, a washout with PBS was 
performed  prior  to  replacing  the  medium  with  chemical-free

supplemented  long-term  medium  to  minimize  acute  substance 
effects  during  MEA  recordings.  For  this  purpose,  the  medium 
was  completely  removed  and  replaced  by  adding  300  µL  pre-
warmed PBS. After incubation for 30 min (37°C, 5% CO2), PBS 
was replaced by freshly supplemented long-term medium. After 
recording, the medium was again replaced with long-term medi-
um containing the test compound. Two compounds were tested 
per 48-well MEA plate including solvent and endpoint-specific 
controls.  Each  independent  experiment  (biological  replicate) 
results  from  a  different  thawing  procedure  done  on  a  different 
day and comprises three technical replicates (replicate wells, see 
Fig. S11). In this study, we followed a two-step testing paradigm, 
where each compound was initially tested twice independently. 
If  the  two  independent  experiments  showed  the  same  results, 
e.g., no effect, no additional experiment was conducted. In case 
of conflicting outcomes, a third experiment was performed. The 
experimental setup is summarized in Figure 1.
MEA recording
Spontaneous electrical network activity on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 
35 was recorded with the Axion Maestro Pro system, a 768-chan-
nel amplifier, and AxIS software version 1.5.3 or later (Axion Bio-
systems, Atlanta, USA). The recording procedure of the electrical 
network activity was composed of a 15-min equilibration period 
and two consecutive measurements of 15 min each, whereas only 
the last 15-min recording was used for further analysis. The last 
pipetting (washout) was performed 24 h prior to the measurement. 
For  acute  response  measurements  (CNQX,  BIC),  pipetting  was 
performed  right  before  the  measurement,  with  a  5-min  wash-in 
phase, and only the first 15 min recording was analyzed. All re-
cordings were conducted at 37°C and 5% CO2. The activity was 
measured  using  a  gain  of  1000x  and  a  sampling  frequency  of  
12.5 kHz. A Butterworth band-pass filter was used (200-3000 Hz) 
prior to spike detection (threshold of 6x root mean square [RMS] 
noise on each electrode) via the AxIS adaptive spike detector. An 
active electrode was defined as ≥ 5 spikes/min.
Cytotoxicity assessment
Cytotoxicity  was  assessed  every  week  and  three  days  after 
re-dosing (at DIV 10, 17, 24, and 31) using the CytoTox-ONE 
Homogeneous  Membrane  Integrity  Assay,  which  is  based  on 
measurement  of  lactate  dehydrogenase  (LDH)  release,  ac-
cording  to  the  manufacturer’s  instructions  (#G7891,  Promega, 
Madison, United States). 50 µL medium from each well was re-
moved, transferred to a 96-well plate (Sarstedt), and 50 µL Cy-
toTox-ONE reagent was added. 30 min prior to the cytotoxicity 
assay, three wells of the lysis plate were treated with 10% Tri-
ton-X 100, and the supernatant was used as lysis positive con-
trol. As a background control, 50 µL of supplemented long-term 
medium was incubated with the same volume of CytoTox-ONE 
reagent.  Following  2  h  of  incubation  at  room  temperature,  the 
fluorescence was detected with a Tecan infinite M200 Pro reader 
(ex: 540 nm; em: 590 nm).
2 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/drc/index.html
Data analyses
After recording with the AxIS software, recordings were re-re-
corded using the same software, resulting in .spk files. For sin-
gle  electrode  burst  detection,  the  inter-spike  interval  threshold 
algorithm was used with a maximum inter-spike interval of

ms with at least five spikes. Additionally, network bursts were 
detected using the Axion Neural Metric Tool and the envelope 
algorithm with a threshold factor of 1.5, a minimum inter-burst 
interval  of  100  ms,  and  60%  active  electrodes. The  synchrony 
window was set to 20 ms. This resulted in 72 network parame-
ters for five time points and seven concentrations. As a manual 
evaluation of all 72 parameters was not possible, an automated 
evaluation  workflow  that  calculates  the  trapezoidal  area  under 
the  curve  (AUC)  and  benchmark  concentrations  (BMC)  was 
set up. AUC was calculated as previously described by Brown 
and  colleagues  (Brown  et  al.,  2016).  Consecutively,  spline  in-
terpolations with degree 1 polynomials for the data points given 
for conditions were made for each endpoint in each plate. If the 
response for an endpoint for the DIV 7 measurement was miss-
ing, e.g., because of absent bursting  activity in an active well, 
it was set using random sampling throughout overall available 
first DIV responses for that endpoint on the same plate when at 
least 50% of these responses were available. In the final pre-pro-
cessing step, a common time duration, related to one DIV, with 
available responses in the resulting data was determined for each 
endpoint and experiment. Finally, the AUC from these common 
durations was determined.
The pesticide data presented in this paper were derived from 
two to three individual experiments per compound as stated in 
Table S11. The data was normalized to the median solvent con-
trol and re-normalized to the starting point of a concentration-re-
sponse  curve  generated  with  the  R  package  drc2  as  described 
below. For cytotoxicity data, a different normalization was used: 
The normalized cytotoxicity response equaled the lysis control 
(LC) median minus the response of the respective concentration 
divided  by  the  lysis  control  median  minus  the  solvent  control 
(SC) median:
normalized response =
                                          LC(median) ‒ SC(median)
LC(median) ‒ response
(Eq. 1)
BMCs (BMC50 and BMC50ind) with their upper and lower confi-
dence intervals (CI) were calculated based on the R package drc2. 
Linear, sigmoidal, monotonic, and non-monotonic models were 
run with the concentration-response data of each endpoint, and 
Akaike’s information criteria were used to determine the best fit. 
Endpoints were classified as DNT-specific if CIs of the BMCs 
calculated for the DNT-specific endpoint did not overlap with the 
cytotoxicity endpoint. If the overlap exceeded 10%, the endpoint 
was classified as unspecific. Statistical  significance was calcu-
lated  using  GraphPad  Prism  8.2.1  and  one-way  ANOVA  with 
Dunnett’s post-hoc tests or two-tailed Student’s t-tests (p ≤ 0.

was termed significant).

RNA-Seq
NeuCyte’s iPSC-derived glutamatergic and GABAergic-induced 
neurons and human astrocytes were seeded to form iN:glia co-cul-
ture. Cells were harvested on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35, four bio-
logical replicates per time point. RNA-Seq was performed by No-
vogene (CA, USA). Total RNA was extracted using the Qiagen 
RNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germany). For library preparation, 
NEBNext® Ultra™ II RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® was 
used  (New  England  Biolabs,  MA,  USA).  For  sequencing,  No-
vaSeq  6000  was  used,  utilizing  paired-end  150  bp  read  length. 
Downstream data analysis was performed using a combination of 
programs. Alignments were parsed using STAR program. Reads 
were  aligned  to  the  reference  genome  GRCh37  using  STAR 
(v2.S). STAR counted number of reads per gene while mapping. 
The  counts  coincide  with  those  produced  by  HTseq-count  with 
default  parameters.  Then  fragments  per  kilobase  per  million 
mapped reads (FPKM) of each gene were calculated based on the 
length of the gene and read counts mapped to this gene.
Immunostainings
SynFire  iN:glia  co-cultures  were  validated  by  immunostaining 
of  markers  including:  guinea  pig  anti-MAP2  (1:200,  Synaptic 
Systems, 188 004), rabbit anti-synapsin1 (1:200, Synaptic Sys-
tems, 106 008), rabbit anti-VGLUT2 (1:200, Synaptic Systems, 
135 403), rabbit anti-VGAT (1:200, Synaptic Systems, 131 011), 
rabbit anti-GFAP (1:250, Abcam, ab4674). Secondary antibodies 
were  conjugated  to AlexaFluor647  (1:200,  Invitrogen)  and Al-
exaFluor488 (1:200, Invitrogen).
On DIV 35, the co-cultures were fixed with 4% paraformalde-
hyde (Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature for 15 min, washed 
three times with PBS (PAN Biotech), and then incubated over-
night at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution 
(5% goat serum (Sigma Aldrich) + 0.2% Triton X-100 (Sigma 
Aldrich) in PBS). On the second day, co-cultures were washed 
three times with PBS and then incubated with secondary antibod-
ies diluted in blocking solution with 1% Hoechst 33258 (1:100, 
Merck). After washing three times with PBS, fluorescence im-
aging was performed using an automated microscope system for 
high-content imaging (CellInsight CX7 LZR Platform, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
3  Results
Characterization of an MEA-based assay for network formation
The  present  study  describes  the  establishment  and  characteri-
zation of a human iPSC-based NNF assay. The assay was chal-
lenged with 27 pesticides and acetaminophen as a negative con-
trol.  Cells  of  a  defined  cell  type  ratio  (52%  glutamatergic  neu-
rons, 22% GABAergic neurons, 26% astrocytes) were seeded as 
a monolayer culture on each MEA well containing 16 electrodes. 
Figure 2 illustrates immunocytochemical staining of the neural 
networks on DIV 35 as well as their characteristics at different
maturation time points (DIV 7-35) using transcriptome profiling 
(RNA-Seq).  DIV  35  staining  (Fig.  2A)  showed  a  strong  pres-
ence  of  MAP2-positive  neurons  and  a  lower  amount  of  NeuN  
(RBFOX3), indicating a high maturation level of the networks. 
The glial marker GFAP was strongly expressed, and the co-cul-
tures  were  positive  for  the  pre-synaptic  marker  synapsin,  the 
vesicular GABA transporter vGAT, and the vesicular glutamate 
transporter vGLUT.
These characteristics were confirmed by RNA sequencing of 
co-cultures at different time points (Fig. 2B). The maturation of 
neurons within the system was verified by a high expression of 
neuronal maturation markers, e.g., MAP2 (Maccioni and Cam-
biazo,  1995),  DLG4,  and  SYP  (Glantz  et  al.,  2007),  compared 
to  genes  coding  for  immature  neurons,  e.g.,  NEUROD1  (Seki, 
2002).  Additionally,  the  high  expression  of  GFAP  and  AQP4, 
compared to S100B, characterizes the mature glial system (Holst 
et  al.,  2019). Also,  genes  coding  for  GABA  and AMPA  recep-
tors and glutamate transporters showed expression at DIV 7 with 
gradations  within  their  subtypes  (e.g.,  SLC1A2  vs.  SLC1A3). 
Voltage- (VG) and ligand-gated (LG) ion channels were enriched 
in the culture. In comparison to VG- and LG-calcium channels, 
VG-sodium  channels  were  more  highly  expressed.  Moreover, 
expression  of  transcripts  coding  for  dopaminergic,  cholinergic 
(nicotinic  and  muscarinic),  and  NMDA  receptors  (NMDAR) 
were  detected.  Especially  CHRNA3  (Karlin,  2002)  and  DRD

(Missale  et  al.,  1998)  expression  was  enhanced  at  DIV  7  and 
decreased  with  increasing  maturation  of  the  networks.  The 
higher  expression  of  SLC12A5  (KCC2)  compared  to  SLC12A

(NKCC1) at DIV 14 indicates that the cells had passed the GA-
BA switch, which marks the shift from pre-mature excitatory to 
mature inhibitory GABAergic neurons (Leonzino et al., 2016). 
Taken  together,  the  gene  expression  data  show  that  the  neural 
networks develop over time and express a broad variety of genes 
related to neuronal and glial function, which is a prerequisite for 
neural network function.
MEA are important tools to study network electrophysiology. 
MEA recordings provide high-content data based on the record-
ing of extracellular action potentials, so-called spikes, which are 
the basic unit of activity of a neural network. During the develop-
ment of a network, spikes can group into bursts and can synchro-
nize  their  activity,  resulting  in  network  bursts.  To  confirm  the 
contribution  of  functional  GABAergic  and  glutamatergic  neu-
rons in the development of the networks, we performed an acute 
pharmacological modulation of neural networks on DIV 21 by 
challenging the neuronal subtypes with the receptor antagonists 
BIC and CNQX. BIC is a well-studied GABAA receptor antag-
onist, which primarily competitively inhibits binding of GABA 
to its receptors. As a consequence, BIC reduces GABA-activated 
conductance by reducing channel opening times as well as open-
ing frequency, resulting in an increased firing rate (Macdonald et 
al., 1989; Johnston, 2013; Mack et al., 2014). In comparison, CN-
QX primarily antagonizes AMPA-type glutamate receptors and 
thereby suppresses spontaneous excitatory glutamatergic synap-

Fig. 2: 
Immunocytochemical 
staining and gene 
expression profiles 
of SynFire neuronal/
glial co-cultures at 
different maturation 
time points
(A) Immunocyto-
chemical staining of 
different neuronal 
and glial markers of 
differentiated co-cultures 
on DIV 35. Nuclei were 
stained with Hoechst 
(blue) together with 
MAP2 (green) and either 
GFAP, synapsin1, vGAT 
or vGlut, respectively 
(red). Scale bar = 50 µm.  
(B) RNA-Seq data was 
used to generate gene 
expression profiles 
on DIV 7, 14, 21, 28, 
and 35. Values are 
presented as fragments 
per kilobase per 
million mapped reads 
(FPKM). Cut-off for likely 
expression: 2.78 FPKM. 
VG, voltage-gated;  
LG, ligand-gated;  
Ca, calcium; Na, sodium

Fig. 3: Acute pharmacological modulation of DIV 21 neural network activity
Untreated DIV 21 neural networks (baseline, BL) were exposed to 3 µM bicuculline (BIC) or 30 µM cyanquixaline (6-cyano-7-nitro-
quinoxaline-2,3-dione; CNQX), respectively. (A, B) 100-s spike raster plots reveal the effects of 3 µM BIC or 30 µM CNQX on DIV 21 neural 
networks. Spikes are represented as black bars, bursts as blue bars. Pink boxes indicate network bursts. (C-F) 3 µM BIC enhanced  
neural network activity as indicated by the increase in different network parameters compared to the baseline. (G-J) 30 µM CNQX 
decreased neural network activity as measured by the decrease in different network parameters. Data are represented as violin plot 
distributions of 9 (C-F) or 8 (G-J) independent experiments. Dotted lines represent quartiles of distribution, and red bars represent  
the median. Statistical significance was calculated using two-tailed Student’s t-tests. A p-value below 0.05 was termed significant.  
*, significant compared to the respective BL.
tic  activity  (Neuman  et  al.,  1988;  Odawara  et  al.,  2016). After 
baseline recording at DIV 21, cells were exposed to the respec-
tive modulator, and the electrical activity was measured. Expo-
sure to 3 µM BIC increased general electrical activity, especial-
ly synchronous bursting (Fig. 3A, pink boxes), whereas 30 µM  
CNQX led to a loss of organized activity, as illustrated by rep-
resentative  100-s  spike  raster  plots  (Fig.  3A,B).  For  additional 
quality control of the test method, acute treatments with the two 
described modulators were included in every assay run. Violin 
plots  for  each  compound  and  four  different  network  parame-
ters (Fig. 3C-F) illustrate the distribution of these data, and the 
median of 8-9 independent experiments (median of 3 technical 
replicates  each) reveals the effect of both receptor antagonists.
3 µM BIC significantly enhanced the mean firing rate and burst 
duration.  Consistent  with  the  spike  raster  plots,  BIC  doubled 
the percentage of overall spikes contributing to network bursts 
from 40% to 80% (“Network burst percentage”, Fig. 3E) and in-
creased the area under normalized cross-correlation (“AUNCC”, 
Fig.  3F),  which  describes  the  synchronicity  of  the  network.  In 
contrast, CNQX inhibited the overall activity and organization of 
the networks. Especially burst duration and synchronicity were 
impaired with a low degree of variation (Fig. 3H,J).
As already indicated by gene expression data (Fig. 2), electro-
physiological measurements over time confirmed maturation of the 
neural networks based on their display of specific firing patterns 
like organized spiking and synchronicity at later stages of differen-

Fig. 4: Neural network development on 48-well microelectrode arrays (MEA) and its inhibition by bisindolylmaleimide I (Bis-I) 
(A) Representative 120 s spike raster plots referring to DIV 7 to 35. Spikes are represented as black bars, bursts as blue bars. Pink boxes 
indicate network bursts. (B-E) Dot plots showing the distribution of untreated (solvent control; 0.1% DMSO) network activities from DIV

to 35 over four network parameters (mean firing rate, burst duration, network burst percentage, and area under normalized cross-
correlation (AUNCC)). Single dots represent the median of three replicates of each experiment. The red bar defines the median over 
all plates (n = 41). (F-I) Starting at DIV 7, networks were treated with increasing concentrations (0.12; 0.37; 1.11; 3.33 and 10 µM) of the 
PKC inhibitor Bis-I. Different network parameters (mean firing rate, number of active electrodes, network burst percentage, area under 
normalized cross-correlation (AUNCC)) reflect the impairment of Bis-I on neural network development over 35 days of differentiation. Data 
are shown as mean ± SD of four wells. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA. A p-value below 0.05 was termed 
significant. *, significant compared to the earliest DIV.
tiation (Fig. 3A). Representative spike raster plots illustrate these 
features over the 35-day development of the networks (Fig. 4A). At 
DIV 7, spikes (black bars) were the sole form of activity, whereas 
at DIV 14, bursts (blue bars) started to form on single electrodes. 
Along with the increase in bursting activity and the emergence of 
a synchronous network starting on DIV 21, the number of spikes 
between network bursts decreased at DIV 28 and 35. This transi-
tion in network development is reflected by the evaluation of dif-
ferent network parameters of untreated solvent control wells (0.1%  
DMSO) from all plates contributing to this study (n = 41 plates and 
123 wells). Figure 4B-E shows the distribution of different param-
eters between experiments (each data point reflects the median of  
3 wells of each independent experiment) and indicates the varia-
tion of the hNNF assay. On DIV 7 and 14, the mean firing rate was 
notably below 5 Hz, but then rose to 10 Hz, with its peak at DIV

(Fig. 4B). The same trend was observed for the duration of bursts 
between DIV 7 and 35 (Fig. 4C). Nevertheless, some parameters, 
like the network burst percentage or the AUNCC, continuously in-
creased until DIV 35 (Fig. 4D,E). Because the highly organized ac-
tivity of the network is rarely observed at DIV 7 and 14 (Fig. 4E), 
network burst parameters were only considered from DIV 21 to

for the following evaluations.
To show that neural network development within the hNNF as-
say can be altered by a specific mechanism, DIV 7 networks were 
exposed to different concentrations of the PKC inhibitor Bis-I fol-
lowing the exposure scheme described in Figure 1. Bis-I inhibited

Inter-experimental 
COV
28.

9.

11.

Tab. 1: 14 Parameters from MEA recordings and their respective inter-experimental variability as coefficient of variation (COV)
Category
Parameter
Definition
General 
activity
Bursting 
activity
Mean firing rate
Total number of spikes divided by the duration of the analysis (Hz)
Number of active electrodes
Number of electrodes with activity > 5 spikes/min
Number of bursting 
electrodes
Total number of electrodes within the well with bursts/min greater than 
the burst electrode criterion (min # of spikes: 5; max ISI: 100 ms)
Burst duration
Average time from the first spike to last spike in a single-electrode burst
11.

Number of spikes per burst
Average number of spikes in a single-electrode burst
Mean ISI within burst
Mean inter-spike interval, time between spikes, for spikes in a single-
electrode burst
Inter-burst interval
Average time between the start of single-electrode bursts
Burst frequency
Total number of single-electrode bursts divided by the duration of  
the analysis (Hz)
Connectivity
Burst percentage
Number of spikes in single-electrode bursts divided by total number of 
spikes, multiplied by

Network burst frequency
Total number of network bursts divided by the duration of the analysis 
(Hz)
Network burst duration
Average time from the first spike to last spike in a network burst
Network burst percentage
The number of spikes in network bursts divided by the total number of 
spikes, multiplied by

Number of spikes per 
network burst
Average number of spikes in a network burst
Area under normalized 
cross-correlation (AUNCC)
Area under the well-wide pooled inter-electrode cross-correlation 
normalized to the auto-correlations
25.

5.

19.

28.

14.

20.

11.

7.

29.

14.

neurite outgrowth in PC-12 cells (Das et al., 2004), rat cortical 
neurons, and hiPSC-derived neurons (Druwe et al., 2016). Fur-
thermore, in vitro MEA experiments showed decreased firing and 
bursting rates of rat neural networks after Bis-I exposure (Robi-
nette et al., 2011). We observed that network activity was affected 
by  Bis-I  in  a  concentration-dependent  manner,  as  illustrated  by 
representative network parameters in Figure 4F-I. Untreated con-
trols showed a mean firing rate of more than 10 Hz on DIV 35, 
whereas Bis-I interfered with the formation of a functional net-
work starting at low concentrations of 0.12 µM, resulting in about 
5 Hz (Fig. 4F). Exposure to 10 µM Bis-I resulted in a fully muted 
network at DIV 28 and DIV 35 regarding all four displayed net-
work parameters. The network burst percentage was also reduced 
to 20% at DIV 21 and 28 by 1.11 µM Bis-I and to 0% at DIV

(Fig. 4H). This impairment in network bursting is also reflected 
in the AUNCC (Fig. 4I). After this initial proof-of-concept, Bis-I 
was  introduced  as  an  endpoint-specific  positive  control  for  the 
hNNF test method. For this purpose, each experimental run in the 
compound screening contained control wells treated with 5 µM 
Bis-I. The data of 13 independent experiments (39 wells) showed 
that  Bis-I  reliably  and  significantly  inhibits  different  network 
parameters,  e.g.,  burst  duration,  network  burst  percentage,  and 
network  synchronicity  (AUNCC,  Fig.  S21).  The  overall  effect
of Bis-I on the mean firing rate was not statistically significant, 
which may be due to the higher variability of this parameter, as 
explained in the next section (see Fig. S21).
Selection of parameters to evaluate
MEA recordings generated in this study result in 72 network pa-
rameters, which are predominantly correlated and can be grouped 
into spike-, burst- and network-related parameters. A plethora of 
these define the same characteristic of the network (e.g., “mean 
firing rate” and “weighted mean firing rate”) or use a different 
statistical method to describe the parameter (e.g., “inter-burst in-
terval-Avg” vs “inter-burst interval (median)-Avg”). The evalu-
ation of one 48-well MEA plate during a time course of 35 days 
results in over 17,000 data points, which makes the processing of 
data and interpretation of possible compound effects enormous-
ly  challenging.  To  reduce  the  number  of  data  points  and  only 
concentrate on the most informative and at the same time robust 
parameters, we analyzed the variability of all parameters across 
all wells treated with the lowest concentration of each test com-
pound. To this end, we calculated the inter-experimental variabil-
ity for each parameter by merging the endpoint responses of the 
lowest concentrations of independent experiments relative to the 
solvent  control  and  normalizing  these. Afterwards,  we  derived

Fig. 5: Example data for area under the curve (AUC) summary of time- and concentration-dependent MEA readouts
(A-C) Starting at DIV 7, neural networks were treated with increasing concentrations of deltamethrin (A), β-cyfluthrin (B), and α-endosulfan 
(C), and exemplary network parameters were evaluated. Time- and concentration-dependent data are shown as the mean of three (A, B) 
or two (C) independent experiments ± SEM (A, B) or SD (C). AUC values were computed for these data and plotted in a concentration-
dependent relationship (D-F). Compounds did not induce cytotoxicity (data not shown). Data are represented as the mean of three (D, E) 
or two (F) independent experiments ± SEM (D, E) or ± SD (F). Replicates within one experiment are summarized by median. Curve fitting 
was conducted as described in Section 2. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA. A p-value below 0.05 was termed 
significant. *, significant compared to the respective solvent control.
the inter-experimental variability as the coefficient of variation 
(COV)  of  these  collections  of  data  points  for  each  compound. 
The higher the COV, the greater is the dispersion. Additionally, 
we  included  parameters  that  were  previously  described  in  the 
literature (Brown et al., 2016; Frank et al., 2017; Kosnik et al., 
2020)  and  represent  a  broad  variety  of  network  development 
characteristics. We then selected a final set of 14 network param-
eters that cover the three categories “general activity”, “bursting 
activity”, and “connectivity” of neural networks and have a COV 
between 6 and 29 (Tab. 1).
Concentration-dependent effects of pesticides on network  
activity
After  having  set  up  the  hNNF  assay  by  defining  a  treatment 
scheme  and  standard  operating  procedure,  establishing  an  end-
point-specific  control,  and  evaluating  variability  over  wells  and 
plates, we next applied the hNNF assay to screen 28 chemicals. 
The set consists of 27 pesticides plus acetaminophen as a negative 
control  compound.  To  identify  concentration-dependent  effects 
of substances that impaired neural network formation, cells were 
exposed weekly from DIV 7 to 35, including respective washout 
steps 24 h before each recording. As an example, deltamethrin and
β-cyfluthrin reduced the mean firing rate (Fig. 5A) and AUNCC 
(Fig. 5B) of neural networks, respectively, in a time- and concen-
tration-dependent manner without inducing cytotoxicity. Aciben-
zolar-S-methyl,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  affect  the  number  of 
active  electrodes  (Fig.  5C).  These  time-concentration  relation-
ships can be translated into concentration-response curves as il-
lustrated in Figure 5D-F. For each concentration, the trapezoidal 
AUC was calculated to include all five time points in one single 
value  per  concentration. This  approach,  adapted  from  Brown  et 
al. (2016) and Shafer (2019), simplifies the comparison of effects 
over  different  days  of  neural  network  development.  In  the  next 
step,  the AUC  information  and  resulting  concentration-response 
curves were used to estimate BMCs with upper and lower confi-
dence limits for each compound and parameter. For estimation of 
the BMCs, a benchmark response (BMR) of 50% (BMR50) was 
selected  as  this  best  reflects  the  variability  of  the  most  variable 
parameters (see Tab. 1).
Figure  6  summarizes  the  concentration-dependent  effects  of 
the  28  tested  compounds  on  neural  network  development  that 
produced a 50% change (reduction or induction) from the curve’s 
starting point. Five of the 14 network parameters were not affect-
ed by any compound, including number of active electrodes and

Fig. 6: Summary of 
BMCs across 14 network 
parameters of the hNNF 
assay
No cytotoxicity was  
observed. 17 compounds  
had no effect (acetamino-
phen, acetamiprid, 
acibenzolar-s-methyl, 
aldicarb, chlorpyrifos, 
chlorpyrifos-methyl, 
clothianidin, diazinon, 
dimethoate, dinotefuran, 
disulfoton, etofenprox, 
flufenacet, methamidophos, 
thiacloprid, thiamethoxam, 
triallate; data not shown).  
Δ, induced effects; numbers 
are given in µM. No value 
assumes BMCs > 20 µM 
(> 0.3 µM for rotenone). 
Confidence intervals are 
listed in Table S23. AUNCC, 
area under normalized 
cross-correlation.
mean inter-spike interval within bursts. 17 compounds tested neg-
ative, e.g., acetaminophen, chlorpyrifos, and its derivate chlorpyri-
fos-methyl (data not shown). 11 of the 27 pesticides are considered 
positive,  for  which  at  least  one  network  parameter  had  to  be  af-
fected without cytotoxic effects at any administered concentration. 
β-Cyfluthrin, β-cypermethrin, deltamethrin, penthiopyrad, and ro-
tenone evoked effects in more than two parameters, whereas the 
other six pesticides affected one or two parameters. Network burst 
frequency was the most sensitive parameter with six hits, of which 
five  represent  inductive  effects.  Furthermore,  spirodiclofen  and 
penthiopyrad  additively  increased  the  burst  frequency.  Predomi-
nantly, the observed effects are all in a similar range between 9 and 
20  µM.  In  contrast,  deltamethrin  and  metaflumizone  influenced 
different network parameters below 9 µM. Rotenone is denoted as 
the most potent compound, specifically reducing seven parameters 
in a concentration range between 0.15 and 0.24 µM without caus-
ing cytotoxicity. The network parameter connectedness, e.g., burst 
rate and mean firing rate, seen after rotenone treatment is not visi-
ble for all compounds. This might be due to parameters compensat-
ing each other, like penthiopyrad decreasing the number of spikes 
per burst and increasing the burst frequency at the same time or 
BMCs being close to the upper testing limit, like for β-cyfluthrin.
4  Discussion
In the last years, scientists from academia, industry, and regula-
tory authorities across the world agreed on the need for a stan-
dardized in vitro testing strategy, aiming for a cheaper and faster 
generation of additional data for DNT hazard assessment (EFSA, 
2013; Crofton et al., 2014; Bal-Price et al., 2015, 2018; Fritsche 
et al., 2017, 2018a,b). This resulted in the compilation of a DNT 
IVB, which includes various test methods covering different KEs 
of  neurodevelopment,  including  the  formation  and  function  of 
neural networks (Fritsche, 2017; Fritsche et al., 2017; Bal-Price 
et al., 2018). One of the gaps identified in the DNT IVB is the 
assessment of network formation and function in a human-based 
cell model (Crofton and Mundy, 2021). To fill this gap, we estab-
3 doi:10.14573/altex.2206031s



lished the human neural network formation assay (hNNF), which 
consists of hiPSC-derived excitatory and inhibitory neurons and 
primary astroglia (SynFire, NeuCyte, USA). The functionality of 
neuronal subtypes and the ability of the cell model to detect al-
terations via a known MoA were confirmed by pharmacological 
modulation. When  challenged with  a test  set  of 28  substances, 
the assay revealed compound-specific effects of different pesti-
cides on network development.
4.1  Assay establishment
Under most circumstances, newly developed methods for DNT 
testing  are  restricted  by  their  inability  to  test  large  numbers  of 
chemicals (Coecke et al., 2007; Crofton et al., 2011). To tackle 
this issue, Crofton et al. (2011) provided a set of 15 principles 
aiming  to  enhance  assay  amenability  to  higher  throughput 
screening.  The  establishment  of  the  hNNF  assay  in  this  study 
was realized by considering these principles, which are described 
in more detail in the following (P1-15). During early brain devel-
opment,  neurons  start  to  mature  and  build  connections  via  
synapses  (Okado  et  al.,  1979;  Zhang  and  Poo,  2001).  Neural  
network formation and function is therefore a key aspect of neu-
rodevelopment (P1 “Key event of neurodevelopment”). By mea-
suring extracellular local field potentials on MEAs, network for-
mation and function can be assessed, thus providing information 
on  electrical  activity,  firing  patterns,  and  synchronicity  of  the 
neural  networks  (P2  “Endpoint  measurement”).  By  calculating 
the AUC  for  each  concentration  and  normalizing  the  values  to 
the respective solvent control, the hNNF assay can reflect alter-
ations  of  network  activity  in  both  directions  (increase  and  de-
crease; P3 “Dynamic range”). Furthermore, Crofton et al. (2011) 
emphasize  the  importance  of  parametric  controls,  meaning  pa-
rameters of the assay that evoke predictable changes in the end-
point (P4 “Parametric controls”). One aspect that was confirmed 
within  the  presented  study  is  the  increase  in  electrical  activity 
and synchronicity of the networks with increasing culture time 
(Fig. 3). Furthermore, Saavedra and colleagues showed that an 
excitatory:inhibitory (ex:inh) ratio of 70:30 using SynFire neu-
rons exhibits the steadiest spiking increase and coverage of elec-
trodes over differentiation time compared to other ex:inh ratios 
(Saavedra  et  al.,  2021).  Principle  5  (“Response  characteriza-
tion”)  highlights  the  relevance  of  a  precise  effect  characteriza-
tion, based on the degree of variability in the assay. As recom-
mended by the EFSA Scientific Committee, the BMC approach 
was  applied  to  derive  a  reference  point  or  point  of  departure 
(Hardy et al., 2017), whereby the BMR should be defined as an 
effect size that is higher than the general variability of the mea-
sured endpoint. Based on the inter-experimental standard devia-
tion (1.5*COV), which was calculated for every parameter pre-
sented in this study (Tab. 1), we defined the BMR50 (reduction) 
and BMR50ind (induction) as the degree of change that, if ex-
ceeded, results in a positive response (hit). Furthermore, Crofton 
and colleagues (2011) state that the concentration range covered, 
and the resulting concentration-response, play a highly signifi-
cant role in terms of comparison of sensitivity between different 
endpoints. For this study, we selected a concentration range that 
has already been used in other in vitro DNT assays and has elicit-
ed little to no cytotoxicity (Frank et al., 2017; Masjosthusmann 
et  al.,  2020;  Blum  et  al.,  2022). To  discriminate  specific  from 
unspecific  effects,  we  assessed  the  cytotoxicity  of  each  com-
pound  on  a  weekly  level  during  the  35-day  culture  period  (P

“Endpoint  selectivity”). Another  crucial  requirement  for  assay 
development is the selection of endpoint-specific controls, alter-
ing the endpoint by known MoA both negatively and positively. 
In the present study, Bis-I, a PKC inhibitor was selected as an 
endpoint-specific control (P8 “Endpoint-selective controls”). In 
primary rat cortical cells, the inhibition of PKC blocked the local 
astrocytic contact and thus the facilitation of excitatory synapto-
genesis throughout the neuron (Hama et al., 2004). In particular, 
in  MEA  experiments,  Bis-I  decreased  the  firing  and  bursting 
rates  of  rat  neural  networks  in  vitro  (Robinette  et  al.,  2011). 
Within the hNNF assay, Bis-I reliably reduced network parame-
ters, e.g., burst duration, network burst percentage, and network 
synchronicity (AUNCC). Due to the enhanced variability of the 
mean firing rate, no significant effect of Bis-I was observed over 
all conducted experimental runs. Nevertheless, Bis-I is an appro-
priate endpoint-specific control for assessing neural network ac-
tivity in vitro. As a negative control compound, acetaminophen 
showed no effect on network activity. A plethora of studies con-
firmed the use of acetaminophen as an apt negative control for 
DNT in vitro testing (Radio et al., 2008; Stern et al., 2014; Brown 
et  al.,  2016;  Masjosthusmann  et  al.,  2020).  Nevertheless,  a  re-
cently published study by Martin and colleagues categorized ac-
etaminophen as an unfavorable negative control for DNT assays 
(Martin et al., 2022). This classification was made based on both 
clinical  and  preclinical  reports,  which  indicate  potential  effects 
on  the  developing  brain.  Furthermore,  the  authors  propose  the 
use of low concentrations of acetaminophen (≤ 100 μM) in recent 
DNT  studies  as  a  possible  reason  for  the  absence  of  com-
pound-dependent effects. In comparison, chemicals like L-ascor-
bic acid, dinotefuran, and metformin were listed as “favorable” 
and should be included in a compound set for later determination 
of the assay’s general performance (Martin et al., 2022). Follow-
ing  the  recommendations  of  Crofton  and  colleagues,  a  training 
set of chemicals should be designed and assayed (P9 “Training 
set chemicals”) after demonstrating that the test method has the 
aforementioned characteristics. Chemicals that produce a reliable 
effect on the endpoint in focus and chemicals that do not should 
be included, which allows both specificity and sensitivity of the 
assay to be determined (P11 “Specificity and sensitivity”). The 
hNNF assay was established and used within a research project 
with a focus on pesticides. Owing to the high cost involved in 
performing substance screening in the assay, it was not possible 
to distinguish between training and test set of chemicals during 
the establishment process. Instead, we selected pesticides that 
have a different DNT potential according to several in vivo and 
in vitro studies (P10 “Testing set chemicals”; Masjosthusmann 
et al., 2020). Pyrethroids, for example, are connected to neuro-
developmental disorders during childhood after pyrethroid pes-
ticide exposure in epidemiological studies (Oulhote and Bouch-
ard, 2013; Xue et al., 2013; Pitzer et al., 2021). Especially del-
tamethrin is a thoroughly studied type II pyrethroid, for which 
animal studies reported long-term effects on the brain (summa-

rized  in  Pitzer  et  al.,  2021),  which  was  also  observed  in  vitro 
(Shafer et al., 2008; Masjosthusmann et al., 2020). In contrast, 
the neonicotinoid dinotefuran was described as DNT negative in 
vivo (Sheets et al., 2016) and also recommended as a negative 
tool  compound  for  alternative  DNT  test  methods  (Aschner  et 
al., 2017). In the future, the hNNF assay will be challenged with 
more chemicals that are well-described DNT positive and nega-
tive compounds to assess specificity and sensitivity of the assay 
and to enhance the readiness of the test method (Bal-Price et al., 
2018). Currently, the academic setup of the hNNF assay allows 
parallel testing of 12 compounds (n = 1) within the 35-day ex-
perimental  period.  However,  it  is  possible  to  increase  the 
throughput  by  increasing  the  plate  size  format  from  48-  to 
96-well or by introducing automation. Duplicating the experi-
mental set-up by using multiple MEA recording devices or by 
shifting the recording days in a periodic manner would also in-
crease  the  throughput  (P12  “High  throughput”).  Principle

(“Documentation”) highlights the importance of documenting 
the test method in detail to allow easy transfer and implementa-
tion across laboratories. A detailed standardized protocol exists 
and  is  currently  being  transferred  to  a  laboratory  of  the  U.S. 
EPA. After initial establishment of the assay in the collaborat-
ing laboratory, the hNNF assay will be challenged with a set of 
test substances to inform about the robustness and inter-labora-
tory transferability of the assay. This point is also emphasized 
in  principle  14  (“Transferability”),  along  with  the  guaranteed 
availability of the cells used, which can be purchased commer-
cially by other researchers. Currently, the generated data is not 
being  shared  through  an  open  access  databased  (P15  “Data 
sharing”), but the authors aim to include hNNF data in a future 
ToxCast™4 release.
In summary, the hNNF assay fulfils the majority of the prin-
ciples proposed by Crofton et al. (2011) for the establishment of 
in vitro DNT assays for substance screening. Currently, the low 
number of tested chemicals defines the lack of readiness of the 
assay (Phase I Readiness Score B, Phase II Readiness Score C; 
Bal-Price  et  al.,  2018),  and  the  improvements  required  for  the 
assay to be ready will be tackled in the future by testing known 
DNT positive substances (Aschner et al., 2017).
4.2  The hNNF assay compared to its rat counterpart
The hNNF assay was established to model neural network for-
mation  and  function  in  a  human-based  cell  model  and  to  be-
come a valuable addition to the current DNT IVB, which com-
prises 17 different test methods able to measure changes in key 
neurodevelopmental  processes  (Masjosthusmann  et  al.,  2020; 
Crofton  and  Mundy,  2021).  Neural  network  formation  and 
function is currently modelled in an assay based on rat primary 
cortical  cells  (rNNF),  assessing  the  developmental  effects  of 
chemicals over 12 days of differentiation (Brown et al., 2016). 
It is important to mention that we aligned the hNNF assay with 
the parameter set of the rNNF assay, and thus both assays pro-
vide  comparable  parameters  of  network  development  (e.g.,
number of active electrodes or burst duration) to reduce uncer-
tainty. Table 2 juxtaposes the results obtained in this study with 
rNNF data (Frank et al., 2017). Comparing the BMC50 values 
of the most sensitive endpoint (MSE) between the hNNF and  
rNNF assay, it becomes clear that the observed positive hits dif-
fer in sensitivity across all substances. The rNNF seems to be 
more sensitive as it detects effects on network activity even at 
lower concentrations of the tested substances, e.g., deltamethrin 
(BMC50 MSE hNNF: 2.74 µM; BMC50 MSE rNNF: 0.5 µM).  
Aldicarb and chlorpyrifos were negative in the  hNNF but al-
tered  network  formation  in  the  rNNF  assay.  Acetaminophen 
was tested negative in both assays.
The  hNNF  and  rNNF  are  referred  to  as  complementary  as-
says because they measure similar endpoints, i.e., several MEA 
parameters,  but  differ  with  regard  to  species  (rat  vs.  human), 
presence  of  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS),  and  assay  technology 
(beginning  and  washout  of  compounds  before  MEA  record-
ings). Therefore, differences in data obtained within these assays 
are not necessarily evidential of a false detection (Crofton and 
Mundy, 2021). These differences may result from several differ-
ences  in  the  assay  setup,  i.e.,  species  differences  and  exposure 
schemes. The hNNF and rNNF assays are based on the same ba-
sic cell types, namely neurons and astrocytes, but derived from 
different species (hNNF: human iPSC-derived neurons and pri-
mary astroglia; rNNF: rat primary neocortical cells). It is widely 
accepted  that  the  predictability  of  non-human-based  assays  for 
human  health  is  limited  by  species  differences  (Leist  and  Har-
tung, 2013). Also, primary neural progenitor cells (NPC) derived 
from rats (PND5) are more sensitive towards exposure to DNT 
compounds  compared  to  time-matched  primary  human  NPCs 
in  vitro  (Baumann  et  al.,  2016).  These  two  systems  differ  not 
only in their sensitivity but also with regard to their molecular 
equipment notwithstanding similar cellular functions (e.g., NPC 
migration and differentiation; Masjosthusmann et al., 2018). Re-
cently, the co-culture system applied in this study was used for 
comparing  acute  effects  of  neurotoxic  compounds  on  network 
activity  to  rodent  cultures  (rNNF)  and  revealed  a  considerable 
delay in human iPSC-derived neuronal and glial co-culture com-
pared  to  rat  cortical  cultures  (Saavedra  et  al.,  2021).  In  gener-
al, the developing rat brain exhibits some crucial differences to 
human brain development in vivo, such as the absence of gyri-
fication, which adds complexity to the human brain (Dubois et 
al., 2008). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that embryonic 
day (E) 18 and E21 during rat brain development match week 8-

and week 15-16 after fertilization in human embryo, when look-
ing at neurogenesis (Bayer et al., 1993). The faster maturation of 
rodent cells compared to human cells in vitro was also suggested 
by Masjosthusmann et al. (2018).
As the compound set presented in Table 2 is rather small and 
focused on pesticides, we cannot draw general conclusions about 
species-specific differences in sensitivity between the rNNF and 
hNNF  assays. As  suggested  by  Baumann  et  al.  (2016),  testing 
of additional compounds with known MoAs is required to infer
4 http://www.epa.gov/ncct/toxcast

Tab. 2: Comparison of BMC50 values of the most sensitive endpoint (MSE) for chemicals (same CASRN) tested in the hNNF  
(this study) and rNNF assay (Frank et al., 2017) 
↑ indicates an inductive effect (BMC50ind).
Acetaminophen
Aldicarb
BMC50 MSE hNNF
no hit
BMC50 MSE rNNF
no hit
no hit
0.

Carbaryl 
17.31↑
Chlorpyrifos  Deltamethrin  Fipronil 
11.48 ↑
no hit
2.

0.

1.

0.

1.

Imidacloprid
15.

9.

more  general species-specific sensitivity.  Nevertheless, our da-
ta highlights the importance of considering species specificities 
when comparing screening results.
Besides the species, experimental procedures differ between 
the human and rat NNF assays and may also lead to differences 
in assay sensitivity. Two major exposure differences are crucial. 
First,  the  time  point  when  the  compound  is  administered  dif-
fers  between  the  hNNF  and  rNNF  assay.  Rat  cortical  cultures 
are exposed to the compound two hours after seeding the cells 
on MEAs, whereas the first day of dosing in hNNF experiments 
is DIV 7, when first single spike activities are visible. The re-
spective networks are at different stages of development at this 
time, i.e., in contrast to human cells, rat cortical cells are barely 
established  in  the  culture  dish.  Not  yet  established  cells  chal-
lenged shortly after the plating process may be more suscepti-
ble to substance exposure than networks that have already been 
able to differentiate for a week in chemical-free medium. In the  
rNNF  assay,  early  processes  like  neurite  initiation  and  out-
growth  as  well  as  glial  proliferation  are  potentially  disrupted 
within  the  first  24  h  (Harrill  et  al.,  2011;  Frank  et  al.,  2017), 
whereas  these  processes  can  proceed  undisturbed  during  the 
first seven days of differentiation and contribute to network de-
velopment in the hNNF assay. Both assays thus depict different 
stages of neural network development and hence include differ-
ent windows of neurodevelopmental processes. In addition, the 
hNNF culture medium, in contrast to the rNNF medium, is sup-
plemented with FBS, which contains a variety of plasma pro-
teins, peptides, and growth factors. Recent studies have shown 
that FBS in cell culture medium attenuates the toxicity caused 
by specific compounds due to their high affinity for binding to 
proteins, which then results in higher BMC values (Zhang, Y. et 
al., 2016; Zhang, R., 2020). The influence of FBS on the human 
cultures with regards to network effects needs to be studied by 
assessment of in vitro kinetics in the future (Kramer et al., 2015). 
Secondly, the washout of the respective compound 24 h prior to 
the recording is a unique feature of the hNNF assay and aims 
at minimizing acute substance effects during MEA recordings. 
There is evidence that specific substances directly target synap-
tic receptors and acutely affect brain function. For example, the 
NMDAR is a prime target of the heavy metal lead, leading to the 
inhibition of glutamatergic synapse activity (Toscano and Gui-
larte, 2005). To diminish the measurement of these acute effects 
and to only assess the effects of substances on neural network 
development, we introduced washout steps into the experimen-
tal procedure of the hNNF. In comparison to the rNNF results 
(Tab. 2), it is possible that the presence of compounds during
MEA measurements contributes to higher sensitivity of the rat 
versus the human NNF assay.
All of the aforementioned variations in assay setup and biol-
ogy, either alone or in combination, can explain the discrepan-
cies  in  sensitivity  between  the  two  test  methods.  In  the  future, 
exposure schemes of the two NNF assays should be harmonized 
in order to understand the true nature of species differences con-
cerning neural network formation. This might substantially help 
to extrapolate from rat in vivo studies to humans using the paral-
lelogram approach (Baumann et al., 2016).
4.3  Use of hNNF data on deltamethrin for 
the development of a putative AOP
In 2021, the EFSA developed an IATA case study with the goal 
of including all available in vivo and in vitro data, among others 
the data generated within the DNT IVB for DNT hazard iden-
tification  for  the  Type  II  pyrethroid  insecticide  deltamethrin 
(Crofton  and  Mundy,  2021;  Hernández-Jerez  et  al.,  2021).  Ep-
idemiological  studies  revealed  associations  between  childhood 
exposure to pyrethroids like deltamethrin and neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders, e.g., attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or au-
tism spectrum disorder (Oulhote and Bouchard, 2013; Shelton et 
al., 2014; Wagner-Schuman et al., 2015). As previously shown, 
deltamethrin negatively influenced 5 of 14 parameters describ-
ing network function with “Number of spikes per network burst” 
as the most sensitive endpoint within the hNNF assay (BMC

2.7 µM). Here, interference with voltage-gated sodium channels 
is  the  most  commonly  known  MoA  for  pyrethroid  insecticides 
like  deltamethrin  (Tapia  et  al.,  2020),  representing  one  of  two 
molecular  initiating  events  (MIE)  within  the  stressor-specific 
AOP network (Fig. 7). This MIE is followed by key events 1-

and 9, describing different cellular responses, like the disruption 
of sodium channel gate kinetics leading to disruption of action 
potential,  that  in  the  end  cumulate  in  an  impaired  behavior-
al  function  (adverse  outcome).  KE4  describes  the  alteration  of 
neural  network  function  as  shown  also  by  data  assessed  in  the  
rNNF  (BMC50  0.5  µM;  Tab.  2)  and  hNNF  assay.  The  5-fold 
higher  BMC  of  the  hNNF  assay  compared  to  the  rNNF  assay 
might  be  explained  by  the  different  exposure  paradigm  and/or 
the different species as discussed above in more detail. Further-
more,  potential  mechanisms  or  processes  that  are  disrupted  by 
a chemical agent can be revealed and used for the development 
of  adverse  outcome  pathways  (AOP)  and  also  set  a  new  focus 
for more hypothesis-driven in vivo studies (Hernández-Jerez et 
al., 2021). The postulated stressor-based AOP network (Fig. 7) 
is currently not included in the OECD AOP Wiki, but the EFSA

Fig. 7: AOP network on deltamethrin postulated by the EFSA Panel on Plant Protection Products and their Residues 
Non-adjacent key events for which the biological reasonability and/or empirical evidence is less assured are marked by dashed lines. MIE, 
molecular initiating event; KE, key event; KER, key event relationship; AO, adverse outcome. Adapted from Hernández‐Jerez et al. (2021).
Panel  on  Plant  Protection  Products  and  their  Residues  recom-
mends its submission to the OECD program to further support 
a regulatory uptake. This case study and the inclusion of hNNF 
data  on  deltamethrin  exposure  showed  the  applicability  of  the 
hNNF assay for hazard identification and characterization, con-
sistent with the other assays of the DNT IVB.
The  presented  study  provides  insight  into  the  establishment 
of a novel new approach method assessing alterations on neural 
network formation and function using an hiPSC-derived co-cul-
ture of neurons and primary astroglia. The cell model comprises 
a  broad  variety  of  genes  expressed  exclusively  in  neurons  and 
astrocytes as a prerequisite for neural network function after the 
GABA switch. For example, together with the rNNF assay, it is 
capable of representing NMDAR expression and assessing any 
MoA  involving  NMDAR,  which  distinguishes  these  NNF  as-
says from other assays of the DNT IVB (Masjosthusmann et al., 
2020). Compared to other studies using excitatory and inhibitory 
iNs, the hNNF performs similarly with regard to, e.g., firing rates 
and number of active electrodes. For example, Saavedra and col-
leagues cultured the excitatory and inhibitory iNS, which result-
ed in 14 to 16 active electrodes after 37 days and a mean firing 
rate between 1 and 2 Hz after 21 days. Furthermore, the described 
test system was successfully used to assess acute neuroactive ef-
fects of chemicals (Saavedra et al., 2021; Tukker et al., 2020a,b). 
Although multiple labs utilize MEAs for assessing acute effects 
on  neural  network  activity,  the  number  of  publications  dealing 
with the effects of pesticides on electrophysiological endpoints 
for DNT using human cells is very limited (Di Consiglio et al., 
2020; Pistollato et al., 2021).
Besides astrocytes, also other cell types play an important role 
in development and function of neural networks, such as oligo-
dendrocytes, responsible for myelination (Doretto et al., 2011), 
or microglia, which, among other things, phagocytose weak syn-
apses and regulate neurogenesis (Miyamoto et al., 2016; Paoli-
celli  and  Ferretti,  2017).  To  represent  all  processes  appropri-
ately, the hNNF assay must be complemented with the missing 
cell  types.  Still,  a  proactive  establishment  of  the  assay  already 
reached a medium readiness for use in regulatory screening ap-
proaches with possible improvements in type and number of test 
method controls, inter- and intra-lab transferability, and defini-
tion  of  the  applicability  domains. The  testing  of  28  substances 
revealed  the  suitability  of  the  assay  for  screening  environmen-
tal chemicals like pesticides. In the future, the throughput of the 
hNNF assay as well as its robustness and specificity will be in-
creased  by  testing  additional  substances,  thereby  enlarging  the 
chemical space, to present a suitable addition to the current DNT 
IVB and close one of the identified gaps regarding network for-
mation and function.
References
Aschner,  M.,  Ceccatelli,  S.,  Daneshian,  M.  et  al.  (2017).  Refer-
ence compounds for alternative test methods to indicate devel-
opmental neurotoxicity (DNT) potential of chemicals: Example 
lists and criteria for their selection and use. ALTEX 34, 49-74. 
doi:10.14573/altex.

Bal-Price, A., Crofton, K. M., Leist, M. et al. (2015). Internation-
al STakeholder NETwork (ISTNET): Creating a developmental 
neurotoxicity (DNT) testing road map for regulatory purposes. 
Arch Toxicol 89, 269-287. doi:10.1007/S00204-015-1464-

Bal-Price, A., Hogberg, H. T., Crofton, K. M. et al. (2018). Rec-
ommendation on test readiness criteria for new approach meth-
ods in toxicology: Exemplified for developmental neurotoxicity. 
ALTEX 35, 306-352. doi:10.14573/altex.

Bartmann, K., Hartmann, J., Kapr, J. et al. (2021). Measurement 
of  electrical  activity  of  differentiated  human  iPSC-derived

neurospheres  recorded  by  microelectrode  arrays  (MEA).  In  J. 
Llorens  and  M.  Barenys  (eds),  Experimental  Neurotoxicology 
Methods  (473-488).  Neuromethods  172.  New  York:  Humana. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-1637-6_

Baumann,  J.,  Barenys,  M.,  Gassmann,  K.  et  al.  (2014).  Compa-
rative  human  and  rat  “neurosphere  assay”  for  developmental 
neurotoxicity testing. Curr Protoc Toxicol 59, 12.21.1-12.21.24. 
doi:10.1002/0471140856.TX1221S

Baumann, J., Dach, K., Barenys, M. et al. (2015). Application of 
the neurosphere assay for DNT hazard assessment: Challenges 
and  limitations.  In  Methods  in  Pharmacology  and  Toxicology 
(29). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. doi:10.1007/7653_2015_

Baumann,  J.,  Gassmann,  K.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.  et  al.  (2016). 
Comparative human and rat neurospheres reveal species differ-
ences  in  chemical  effects  on  neurodevelopmental  key  events. 
Arch Toxicol 90, 1415-1427. doi:10.1007/S00204-015-1568-

Bayer, S. A., Altman, J., Russo, R. J. et al. (1993). Timetables of 
neurogenesis in the human brain based on experimentally deter-
mined patterns in the rat. Neurotoxicology 14, 83-144.
Bennett, D., Bellinger, D. C., Birnbaum, L. S. et al. (2016). Project 
TENDR:  Targeting  environmental  neuro-developmental  risks 
the TENDR consensus statement. Environ Health Perspect 124, 
A118-A122. doi:10.1289/EHP

Bjørling-Poulsen, M., Andersen, H. R. and Grandjean, P. (2008). 
Potential  developmental  neurotoxicity  of  pesticides  used  in  
Europe. Environ Health 7, 50. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-7-

Blum,  J.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.,  Bartmann,  K.  et  al.  (2022). 
Establishment of a human cell-based in vitro battery to assess 
developmental neurotoxicity hazard of chemicals. Chemosphere 
311, 137035. doi:10.1016/J.chemosphere.2022.

Brown, J. P., Hall, D., Frank, C. L. et al. (2016). Evaluation of a 
microelectrode  array-based  assay  for  neural  network  ontog-
eny  using  training  set  chemicals.  Toxicol  Sci  154,  126-139. 
doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfw

Carstens,  K.  E.,  Carpenter,  A.  F.,  Martin,  M.  M.  et  al.  (2022). 
Integrating data from in vitro new approach methodologies for 
developmental  neurotoxicity.  Toxicol  Sci  187,  62-79.  doi:10. 
1093/toxsci/kfac

Incorporating
Coecke, S., Goldberg, A. M., Allen, S. et al. (2007). Workgroup 
for 
report: 
developmental neurotoxicity into international hazard and risk as-
sessment strategies. Environ Health Perspect 115, 924-931. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.

in  vitro  alternative  methods
Crofton, K. M., Mundy, W. R., Lein, P. J. et al. (2011). Develop-
mental neurotoxicity testing: Recommendations for developing 
alternative methods for the screening and prioritization of chem-
icals. ALTEX 28, 9-15. doi:10.14573/altex.2011.1.

Crofton, K. M., Mundy, W. R. and Shafer, T. J. (2012). Develop-
mental neurotoxicity testing: A path forward. Congenit Anom 52, 
140-146. doi:10.1111/j.1741-4520.2012.00377.x
Crofton,  K.,  Fritsche,  E., Ylikomi, T.  et  al.  (2014).  International 
STakeholder NETwork (ISTNET) for creating a developmental 
neurotoxicity  testing  (DNT)  roadmap  for  regulatory  purposes. 
ALTEX 31, 223-224. doi:10.14573/altex.

ity in vitro testing assays for use in integrated approaches for test-
ing and assessment. EFSA Support Publ 18, 6924E. doi:10.2903/
sp.efsa.2021.en-

Dach, K., Bendt, F., Huebenthal, U. et al. (2017). BDE-99 impairs 
differentiation  of  human  and  mouse  NPCs  into  the  oligoden-
droglial lineage by species-specific modes of action. Sci Rep 7, 
44861. doi:10.1038/srep

Das, K. P., Freudenrich, T. M. and Mundy, W. R. (2004). Assess.-
ment of PC12 cell differentiation and neurite growth: A compa-
rison of morphological and neurochemical measures. Neurotoxi-
col Teratol 26, 397-406. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2004.02.

Di Consiglio, E., Pistollato, F., Mendoza-De Gyves, E. et al. (2020). 
Integrating biokinetics and in vitro studies to evaluate develop-
mental  neurotoxicity  induced  by  chlorpyrifos  in  human  iPSC- 
derived  neural  stem  cells  undergoing  differentiation  towards  
neuronal  and  glial  cells.  Reprod  Toxicol  98,  174-188.  doi: 
10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.09.

Doretto, S., Malerba, M., Ramos, M. et al. (2011). Oligodendro-
cytes as regulators of neuronal networks during early postnatal 
development.  PLoS  One  6,  19849.  doi:10.1371/journal.pone.

Druwe, I., Freudenrich, T. M., Wallace, K. et al. (2015). Sensitivity 
of neuroprogenitor cells to chemical-induced apoptosis using a 
multiplexed assay suitable for high-throughput screening. Toxi-
cology 333, 14-24. doi:10.1016/J.TOX.2015.03.

Druwe, I., Freudenrich, T. M., Wallace, K. et al. (2016). Compari-
son of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons and 
rat primary cortical neurons as in vitro models of neurite out-
growth. Appl Vitr Toxicol 2, 26-36. doi:10.1089/aivt.2015.

Dubois, J., Benders, M., Borradori-Tolsa, C. et al. (2008). Primary 
cortical folding in the human newborn: An early marker of lat-
er functional development. Brain 131, 2028-2041. doi:10.1093/
BRAIN/AWN

EFSA (2013). Scientific Opinion on the developmental neurotoxic-
ity potential of acetamiprid and imidacloprid. EFSA J 11, 3471. 
doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2013.

Frank, C. L., Brown, J. P., Wallace, K. et al. (2017). Developmental 
neurotoxicants  disrupt  activity  in  cortical  networks  on  micro-
electrode  arrays:  Results  of  screening  86  compounds  during 
neural  network  formation.  Toxicol  Sci  160,  121-135.  doi:10. 
1093/toxsci/kfx

Fritsche, E., Alm, H., Baumann, J. et al. (2015). Literature review 
on in vitro and alternative developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) 
testing  methods.  EFSA  Support  Publ  12,  778E.  doi:10.2903/
sp.efsa.2015.en-

Fritsche, E. (2017). Report on Integrated Testing Strategies for the 
identification and evaluation of chemical hazards associated with 
the developmental neurotoxicity (DNT), to facilitate discussions 
at  the  Joint  EFSA/OECD  Workshop  on  DNT.  EFSA  Support 
Publ 14, 1191E. doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2017.en-

Fritsche, E., Crofton, K. M., Hernandez, A. F. et al. (2017). OECD/
EFSA  workshop  on  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT):  The 
use of non-animal test methods for regulatory purposes. ALTEX 
34, 311-315. doi:10.14573/altex.

Crofton, K. M. and Mundy, W. R. (2021). External scientific report 
on the interpretation of data from the developmental neurotoxic-
Fritsche, E., Barenys, M., Klose, J. et al. (2018a). Current availabil-
ity of stem cell-based in vitro methods for developmental neu-

rotoxicity (DNT) testing. Toxicol Sci 165, 21-30. doi:10.1093/
toxsci/kfy

munoreactivity patterns of GFAP, S100, AQP4 and YKL-40. J 
Anat 235, 590-615. doi:10.1111/JOA.

Fritsche,  E.,  Grandjean,  P.,  Crofton,  K.  M.  et  al.  (2018b). 
Consensus statement on the need for innovation, transition and 
implementation  of  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT)  test-
ing for regulatory purposes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 354, 3-6. 
doi:10.1016/J.TAAP.2018.02.

Glantz,  L. A.,  Gilmore,  J.  H.,  Hamer,  R.  M.  et  al.  (2007).  Syn-
aptophysin  and  PSD-95  in  the  human  prefrontal  cortex  from 
mid-gestation into early adulthood. Neuroscience 149, 582-591. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.06.

Goldman, L. R. and Koduru, S. (2000). Chemicals in the environ-
ment  and  developmental  toxicity  to  children: A  public  health 
and policy perspective. Environ Health Perspect 108, 443-448. 
doi:10.1289/EHP.00108S

Hyvärinen, T., Hyysalo, A., Kapucu, F. E. et al. (2019). Functional 
characterization of human pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical 
networks differentiated on laminin-521 substrate: Comparison to 
rat cortical cultures. Sci Rep 9, 17125. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-
53647-

Ishii, M. N., Yamamoto, K., Shoji, M. et al. (2017). Human induced 
pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neurons respond to con-
vulsant drugs when co-cultured with hiPSC-derived astrocytes. 
Toxicology 389, 130-138. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2017.06.

Johnstone, A. F. M., Gross, G. W., Weiss, D. G. et al. (2010). Mi-
croelectrode arrays: A physiologically based neurotoxicity test-
ing platform for the 21st century. Neurotoxicology 31, 331-350. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2010.04.

Grandjean, P. and Landrigan, P. (2006). Developmental neurotoxic-
ity of industrial chemicals. Lancet 368, 2167-2178. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(06)69665-

Johnston, G. A. R. (2013). Advantages of an antagonist: Bicucull-
ine and other GABA antagonists. Br J Pharmacol 169, 328-336. 
doi:10.1111/BPH.

Hama, H., Hara, C., Yamaguchi, K. et al. (2004). PKC signaling 
mediates  global  enhancement  of  excitatory  synaptogenesis  in 
neurons triggered by local contact with astrocytes. Neuron 41, 
405-415. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00007-

Hardy, A., Benford, D., Halldorsson, T. et al. (2017). Guidance on 
the use of the weight of evidence approach in scientific assess-
ments. EFSA J 15, e04971. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2017.

Harrill, J. A., Freudenrich, T. M., Machacek, D. W. et al. (2010). 
Quantitative assessment of neurite outgrowth in human embry-
onic stem cell-derived hN2 cells using automated high-content 
image  analysis.  Neurotoxicology  31,  277-290.  doi:10.1016/j.
neuro.2010.02.

Harrill, J. A., Robinette, B. L. and Mundy, W. R. (2011). Use of 
high content image analysis to detect chemical-induced chang-
es  in  synaptogenesis  in  vitro.  Toxicol  In  Vitro  25,  368-387. 
doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2010.10.

Harrill, J. A., Robinette, B. L., Freudenrich, T. et al. (2013). Use of 
high content image analyses to detect chemical-mediated effects 
on neurite sub-populations in primary rat cortical neurons. Neu-
rotoxicology 34, 61-73. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2012.10.

Harrill, J. A., Freudenrich, T., Wallace, K. et al. (2018). Testing for 
developmental neurotoxicity using a battery of in vitro assays for 
key cellular events in neurodevelopment. Toxicol Appl Pharma-
col 354, 24-39. doi:10.1016/J.TAAP.2018.04.

Hernández-Jerez, A., Adriaanse, P., Aldrich, A. et al. (2021). De-
velopment of Integrated Approaches to Testing and Assessment 
(IATA) case studies on developmental neurotoxicity (DNT) risk 
assessment. EFSA J 19, e06599. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2021.

Hoelting, L., Klima, S., Karreman, C. et al. (2016). Stem cell-de-
rived  immature  human  dorsal  root  ganglia  neurons  to  identify 
peripheral  neurotoxicants.  Stem  Cells  Transl  Med  5,  476-487. 
doi:10.5966/SCTM.2015-

Hofrichter, M., Nimtz, L., Tigges, J. et al. (2017). Comparative per-
formance analysis of human iPSC-derived and primary neural 
progenitor cells (NPC) grown as neurospheres in vitro. Stem Cell 
Res 25, 72-82. doi:10.1016/J.SCR.2017.10.

Holst, C. B., Brøchner, C. B., Vitting-Seerup, K. et al. (2019). As-
trogliogenesis in human fetal brain: Complex spatiotemporal im-
Karlin, A. (2002). Emerging structure of the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 3, 102-114. doi:10.1038/nrn

Klose,  J.,  Tigges,  J.,  Masjosthusmann,  S.  et  al.  (2021).  TBBPA 
targets converging key events of human oligodendrocyte devel-
opment resulting in two novel AOPs. ALTEX 38, 215-234. doi: 
10.14573/altex.

Koch, K., Bartmann, K., Hartmann, J. et al. (2022). Scientific va.-
lidation  of  human  neurosphere  assays  for  developmental  neu-
rotoxicity  evaluation.  Front  Toxicol  4,  816370.  doi:10.3389/
ftox.2022.

Kosnik, M. B., Strickland, J. D., Marvel, S. W. et al. (2020). Con-
centration-response evaluation of ToxCast compounds for multi-
variate activity patterns of neural network function. Arch Toxicol 
94, 469-484. doi:10.1007/s00204-019-02636-x
Kramer, N. I., Di Consiglio, E., Blaauboer, B. J. et al. (2015). Bio- 
kinetics in repeated-dosing in vitro drug toxicity studies. Toxicol 
In Vitro 30, 217-224. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2015.09.

Krug, A. K., Balmer, N. V., Matt, F. et al. (2013). Evaluation of a 
human neurite growth assay as specific screen for developmen-
tal  neurotoxicants.  Arch  Toxicol  87,  2215-2231.  doi:10.1007/
s00204-013-1072-y
Kuehn, B. M. (2010). Increased risk of ADHD associated with ear-
ly exposure to pesticides, PCBs. JAMA 304, 27-28. doi:10.1001/
jama.2010.

Leist, M. and Hartung, T. (2013). Reprint: Inflammatory findings 
on species extrapolations: Humans are definitely no 70-kg mice. 
ALTEX 30, 227-230. doi:10.14573/altex.2013.2.

Leonzino, M., Busnelli, M., Antonucci, F. et al. (2016). The timing 
of the excitatory-to-inhibitory GABA switch is regulated by the 
oxytocin receptor via KCC2. Cell Rep 15, 96-103. doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2016.03.

Little, D., Ketteler, R., Gissen, P. et al. (2019). Using stem cell-de-
rived  neurons  in  drug  screening  for  neurological  diseases. 
Neurobiol  Aging  78,  130-141.  doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging. 
2019.02.

Maccioni, R. B. and Cambiazo, V. (1995). Role of microtubule-as-
sociated proteins in the control of microtubule assembly. Phys 
Rev 75, 835-864. doi:10.1152/physrev.1995.75.4.



Macdonald, R. L., Rogers, C. J. and Twyman, R. E. (1989). Kinet-
ic properties of the GABAA receptor main conductance state of 
mouse spinal cord neurones in culture. J Physiol 410, 479-499. 
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1989.sp

Mack, C. M., Lin, B. J., Turner, J. D. et al. (2014). Burst and prin-
cipal  components  analyses  of  MEA  data  for  16  chemicals  de-
scribe at least three effects classes. Neurotoxicology 40, 75-85. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2013.11.

Martin, M. M., Baker, N. C., Boyes, W. K. et al. (2022). An ex-
pert-driven literature review of “negative” chemicals for devel-
opmental neurotoxicity (DNT) in vitro assay evaluation. Neuro-
toxicol Teratol 93, 107117. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2022.

Masjosthusmann, S., Becker, D., Petzuch, B. et al. (2018). A tran-
scriptome  comparison  of  time-matched  developing  human, 
mouse  and  rat  neural  progenitor  cells  reveals  human  unique-
ness.  Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol  354,  40-55.  doi:10.1016/j.taap. 
2018.05.

Masjosthusmann, S., Blum, J., Bartmann, K. et al. (2020). Estab-
lishment of an a priori protocol for the implementation and in-
terpretation of an in-vitro testing battery for the assessment of 
developmental  neurotoxicity.  EFSA  Support  Publ  17,  1938E. 
doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2020.en-

Missale, C., Nash, S. R., Robinson, S. W. et al. (1998). Dopamine 
receptors: From structure to function. Physiol Rev 78, 189-225. 
doi:10.1152/physrev.1998.78.1.

Miyamoto, A., Wake, H., Ishikawa, A. W. et al. (2016). Microglia 
contact induces synapse formation in developing somatosensory 
cortex. Nat Commun 7, 12540. doi:10.1038/ncomms

Neuman,  R.  S.,  Ben-Ari, Y.,  Gho,  M.  et  al.  (1988).  Blockade  of 
excitatory  synaptic  transmission  by  6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxal-
ine-2,3-dione  (CNQX)  in  the  hippocampus  in  vitro.  Neurosci 
Lett 92, 64-68. doi:10.1016/0304-3940(88)90743-

Nimtz, L., Klose, J., Masjosthusmann, S. et al. (2019). The neu-
rosphere  assay  as  an  in  vitro  method  for  developmental  neu-
rotoxicity  (DNT)  evaluation.  Neuromethods  145,  141-168. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9228-7_

Nimtz, L., Hartmann, J., Tigges, J. et al. (2020). Characterization 
and application of electrically active neuronal networks establis-
hed  from  human  induced  pluripotent  stem  cell-derived  neural 
progenitor cells for neurotoxicity evaluation. Stem Cell Res 45, 
101761. doi:10.1016/j.scr.2020.

NRC – National Research Council (2000). Scientific Frontiers in 
Developmental Toxicology and Risk Assessment. National Acad-
emies Press. doi:10.17226/

Nyffeler,  J.,  Dolde,  X.,  Krebs, A.  et  al.  (2017).  Combination  of 
multiple neural crest migration assays to identify environmental 
toxicants from a proof-of-concept chemical library. Arch Toxicol 
91, 3613-3632. doi:10.1007/s00204-017-1977-y
Ockleford, C., Adriaanse, P., Hougaard Bennekou, S. et al. (2018). 
Scientific opinion on pesticides in foods for infants and young 
children. EFSA J 16, e05286. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2018.

Odawara, A., Katoh, H., Matsuda, N. et al. (2016). Physiological 
maturation  and  drug  responses  of  human  induced  pluripotent 
stem cell-derived cortical neuronal networks in long-term cul-
ture. Sci Rep 6, 26181. doi:10.1038/srep

cal evaluation of convulsant and anticonvulsant drugs in human 
induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical neuronal networks 
using an MEA system. Sci Rep 8, 10416. doi:10.1038/s41598-
018-28835-

OECD (2007). Test No. 426: Developmental Neurotoxicity Study. 
OECD  Guidelines  for  the  Testing  of  Chemicals,  Section  4: 
Health  Effects.  http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/20/52/37622194.
pdf (accessed 22.07.2021)
Okado, N., Kakimi, S. and Kojima, T. (1979). Synaptogenesis in 
the cervical cord of the human embryo: Sequence of synapse for-
mation in a spinal reflex pathway. J Comp Neurol 184, 491-517. 
doi:10.1002/cne.

Oulhote, Y.  and  Bouchard,  M.  F.  (2013).  Urinary  metabolites  of 
organophosphate and pyrethroid pesticides and behavioral prob-
lems in Canadian children. Environ Health Perspect 121, 1378-
1384. doi:10.1289/ehp.

Paolicelli, R. C. and Ferretti, M. T. (2017). Function and dysfunc-
tion  of  microglia  during  brain  development:  Consequences 
for synapses and neural circuits. Front Synaptic Neurosci 9, 9. 
doi:10.3389/fnsyn.2017.

Paparella,  M.,  Bennekou,  S.  H.  and  Bal-Price,  A.  (2020).  An 
analysis of the limitations and uncertainties of in vivo develop-
mental neurotoxicity testing and assessment to identify the po-
tential for alternative approaches. Reprod Toxicol 96, 327-336. 
doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2020.08.

Pistollato,  F.,  Carpi,  D.,  Mendoza-de  Gyves,  E.  et  al.  (2021). 
Combining in vitro assays and mathematical modelling to study 
developmental neurotoxicity induced by chemical mixtures. Re-
prod Toxicol 105, 101-119. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2021.08.

Pitzer, E. M., Williams, M. T. and Vorhees, C. V. (2021). Effects of 
pyrethroids on brain development and behavior: Deltamethrin. 
Neurotoxicol Teratol 87, 106983. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2021.

Radio, N. M., Breier, J. M., Shafer, T. J. et al. (2008). Assessment 
of chemical effects on neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells using high 
content screening. Toxicol Sci 105, 106-118. doi:10.1093/toxsci/
kfn

Robinette, B. L., Harrill, J. A., Mundy, W. R. et al. (2011). In vitro 
assessment of developmental neurotoxicity: Use of microelec-
trode arrays to measure functional changes in neuronal network 
ontogeny. Front Neuroeng 4, 1-9. doi:10.3389/fneng.2011.

Rodier, P. M. (1995). Developing brain as a target of toxicity. En-
viron  Health  Perspect  103,  Suppl  6,  73-76.  doi:10.1289/ehp. 
95103s

Saavedra, L., Wallace, K., Freudenrich, T. F. et al. (2021). Compar-
ison of acute effects of neurotoxic compounds on network activi-
ty in human and rodent neural cultures. Toxicol Sci 180, 295-312. 
doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfab

Sachana, M., Bal-Price, A., Crofton, K. M. et al. (2019). Interna-
tional regulatory and scientific effort for improved developmen-
tal  neurotoxicity  testing.  Toxicol  Sci  167,  45-57.  doi:10.1093/
toxsci/kfy

Sagiv, S. K., Thurston, S. W., Bellinger, D. C. et al. (2010). Prenatal 
organochlorine exposure and behaviors associated with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder in school-aged children. Am J Epi-
demiol 171, 593-601. doi:10.1093/aje/kwp

Odawara, A., Matsuda, N., Ishibashi, Y. et al. (2018). Toxicologi-
Schmuck, M. R., Temme, T., Dach, K. et al. (2017). Omnisphero:

A high-content image analysis (HCA) approach for phenotyp-
ic  developmental  neurotoxicity  (DNT)  screenings  of  organ-
oid neurosphere cultures in vitro. Arch Toxicol 91, 2017-2028. 
doi:10.1007/s00204-016-1852-

Seki, T. (2002). Expression patterns of immature neuronal mark-
ers  PSA-NCAM,  CRMP-4  and  NeuroD  in  the  hippocampus 
of young adult and aged rodents. J Neurosci Res 70, 327-334. 
doi:10.1002/jnr.

Shafer, T. J., Rijal, S. O. and Gross, G. W. (2008). Complete in-
hibition  of  spontaneous  activity  in  neuronal  networks  in  vitro 
by deltamethrin and permethrin. Neurotoxicology 29, 203-212. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2008.01.

Shafer, T. J. (2019). Application of microelectrode array approach-
es to neurotoxicity testing and screening. Adv Neurobiol 22, 275-
297. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-11135-9_

Sheets, L. P., Li, A. A., Minnema, D. J. et al. (2016). A critical re-
view of neonicotinoid insecticides for developmental neurotox-
icity. Crit Rev Toxicol 46, 153-190. doi:10.3109/10408444.

5.

Shelton, J. F., Geraghty, E. M., Tancredi, D. J. et al. (2014). Neu-
rodevelopmental disorders and prenatal residential proximity to 
agricultural  pesticides: The  charge  study. Environ  Health  Per-
spect 122, 1103-1109. doi:10.1289/ehp.

Smirnova,  L.,  Hogberg,  H.  T.,  Leist,  M.  et  al.  (2014).  Food  for 
thought  ...  Developmental  neurotoxicity  –  Challenges  in  the 
21st century and in vitro opportunities. ALTEX 31, 129-156. doi: 
10.14573/altex.

Stern, M., Gierse, A., Tan, S. et al. (2014). Human Ntera2 cells as 
a predictive in vitro test system for developmental neurotoxicity. 
Arch Toxicol 88, 127-136. doi:10.1007/S00204-013-1098-

Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M. et al. (2007). Induction of 
pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined 
factors. Cell 131, 861-872. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.

Tapia,  C.  M.,  Folorunso,  O.,  Singh, A.  K.  et  al.  (2020).  Effects 
of  deltamethrin  acute  exposure  on  Nav1.6  channels  and  me-
dium spiny neurons of the nucleus accumbens. Toxicology 440, 
152488. doi:10.1016/j.tox.2020.

Terron, A. and Bennekou, S. H. (2018). Towards a regulatory use of 
alternative developmental neurotoxicity testing (DNT). Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol 354, 19-23. doi:10.1016/j.taap.2018.02.

Toscano,  C.  D.  and  Guilarte,  T.  R.  (2005).  Lead  neurotoxicity: 
From exposure to molecular effects. Brain Res Rev 49, 529-554. 
doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2005.02.

Tsuji, R. and Crofton, K. M. (2012). Developmental neurotoxicity 
guideline study: Issues with methodology, evaluation and regula-
tion*. Congenit Anom (Kyoto) 52, 122-128. doi:10.1111/J.1741-
4520.2012.00374.X
Tukker, A. M., Bouwman, L. M. S., van Kleef, R. G. D. M. et al. 
(2020a).  Perfluorooctane  sulfonate  (PFOS)  and  perfluoroocta-
noate (PFOA) acutely affect human α1β2γ2L GABAA receptor 
and spontaneous neuronal network function in vitro. Sci Rep 10, 
5311. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-62152-

Tukker, A. M., Wijnolts, F. M. J., de Groot, A. et al. (2020b). Ap-
plicability of hiPSC-derived neuronal co-cultures and rodent pri-
mary  cortical  cultures  for  in  vitro  seizure  liability  assessment. 
Toxicol Sci 178, 71-87. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfaa

Uhlhaas, P. and Singer, W. (2006). Neural synchrony in brain disor-
ders: Relevance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology. 
Neuron 52, 155-168. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.

U.S. EPA (1998). Health Effects Guidelines OPPTS 870.6300. Dev
Neurotox Study EPA 71.
Wagner-Schuman, M., Richardson, J. R., Auinger, P. et al. (2015). 
Association of pyrethroid pesticide exposure with attention-defi-
cit/hyperactivity disorder in a nationally representative sample of 
U.S. children. Environ Health 14, 44. doi:10.1186/s12940-015-
0030-y
Xue, Z., Li, X., Su, Q. et al. (2013). Effect of synthetic pyrethroid 
pesticide  exposure  during  pregnancy  on  the  growth  and 
development of infants. Asia Pac J Public Health 25, Suppl 4, 
72S-79S. doi:10.1177/

Zhang, L. I. and Poo, M. M. (2001). Electrical activity and devel-
opment  of  neural  circuits.  Nat  Neurosci  4,  Suppl,  1207-1214. 
doi:10.1038/NN

Zhang, R., Zhang, H., Chen, B. et al. (2020). Fetal bovine serum 
attenuating perfluorooctanoic acid-inducing toxicity to multiple 
human  cell  lines  via  albumin  binding.  J  Hazard  Mater  389, 
122109. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.

Zhang, Y., Xu, Y.-Y., Sun, W.-J. et al. (2016). FBS or BSA inhibits 
EGCG  induced  cell  death  through  covalent  binding  and  the 
reduction of intracellular ROS production. Biomed Res Int 2016, 
5013409. doi:10.1155/2016/

Conflict of interest
KB,  AD,  and  EF  are  shareholders  of  the  company  DNTOX, 
which  provides  DNT  IVB  assay  services,  and  DH,  CN,  JW, 
and PZ have been or are currently employed by NeuCyte Inc., 
a company that commercially distributes the iN:glia co-culture 
described in this study, and all declare no potential conflicts of 
interest  with  respect  to  the  research  in  this  article.  FB  and  EK 
have no conflict of interest to declare.
Funding
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Danish  Environmental  Pro-
tection  Agency  (EPA)  under  grant  number  MST-667-00205, 
and  the  Horizon  Europe  project  PARC  (Grant  Agreement  No 
101057014).
Data availability 
The dataset generated during and/or analyzed during the current 
study  is  available  from  the  corresponding  author  upon  reason-
able request.
470